== > A219 Exploring the Classical World 
eet 3 

= Audio-visual notes 1 

Seis 

S Prepared by the A219 course team 

2 
Contents 
Introduction - 
CD1 , ‘Reading the Homeric texts and Homer in translation’ Z 
CD2, ‘Aeschylus: Persians’ | 5 
CD3, ‘Funeral speeches ancient and modern’ 7 
DVD1, Section 1, ‘Course introduction’ | "2 
DVD1, Section 2, ‘Art and architecture of the Greek “Dark Age”’ ae * 
DVD2, Section 1, ‘The Greek theatre and Persians’ 19 
DVD2, Section 2, ‘Plan reading’ 22 
DVD2, Section 3, ‘The Acropolis and its buildings’ | 23 

Copyright © 2005 The Open University SUP 81156 6 


Printed in the United Kingdom by The Open University 12 


Introduction 


This booklet contains notes on the audio-visual material associated with the first 
part of the course, the Course Introduction and Blocks 1 and 2: that is, CDs 1, 2 
and 3 and DVDs | and 2. The remaining CDs and DVDs will be discussed in 
Audio-visual notes 2. These booklets provide supplementary information that you 
should consult before watching or listening to a CD or DVD. However, they are 
not designed as self-standing sources of information. In many cases, the most 
important information regarding the audio-visual material — in particular 
explanations of how particular sections or tracks fit into the overall teaching 
material — is given in the blocks, and the notes are in some cases little more than 
lists of tracks and titles. You will be directed to specific tracks of a CD or section 
of a DVD as you work through the material in the blocks. Obviously, you may 
wish to return to certain sections and tracks at a later stage, but it 1s probably best 
to watch or listen to them for the first time only when you reach the point in the 
course that prompts you to do so. 


Please note that the DVDs are designed for viewing with a DVD player. You may 
also watch them on a computer with DVD video software, but may find for 
technical reasons that the keyboard operates them faster than the mouse. 


CD1, ‘Reading the Homeric texts and Homer in 
translation’ 


Presenters: Chris Emlyn-Jones and Naoko Yamagata 
Readers: Lucie Fitchett and Leighton Pugh 


Producer: David Blount 


Tracks 1-18: Reading the Homeric texts 


Track 1: Introduction 


Tracks 2—13: Readings and critical analysis of passages from the Odyssey 
Tracks 2—3: Odyssey 4.1—58 
Tracks 4—6: Odyssey 4.703-41 
Tracks 7—8: Odyssey 4.78794 
Tracks 9-13: Odyssey 5.282—332 
Track 14: Conclusion 
Suggested pieces from Odyssey, Books 1-4, for analysis in a self-help group or at 
a tutorial (or for private study): 
1.150-68 
1.42044 
2.303-30 
2.413—34 
3.404—29 
4.12046 
4.675—95 


Tracks 15—18: Appendix: the rhythm of the Homeric line 
Track 16: Odyssey, Book 1, lines 1-5 


Line 1 


andra moi ennepe Mousa polutropon hos mala polla 


man tome tell, © Muse, of many ways who very much 


Line 2 


plangchthe epei Troies hieron ptoliethron eperse; 


wandered whenTroy’s holy _ citadel he sacked 


Line 3 
TevoSt edt wid\adi eect ecu 1 
pollon d’ anthropon iden astea kai noon egno, 


of many men he saw cities and minds _ he got to know 


Line 4 


— BS OS aS Ee eee 
polla d’ ho g’ en pontoi pathen algea hon kata thumon 
but many he on the sea suffered pains in his spirit 


Line 5 
arnumenos hen te psuchen kai noston hetairon 
striving to gain his own life and the return home of his companions. 


Tracks 19—30: Homer in translation 


Tracks 19—20: Introduction 


Tracks 21—23: Reading and critical analysis of Odyssey, Book 1, lines I—5, 
translated by Richmond Lattimore 


Tracks 24—26: Reading and critical analysis of Odyssey, Book 1, lines 1-5, 
translated by Walter Shewring. 


GODDESS of song, teach me the story of a hero. 


This was the man of wide-ranging spirit who had sacked the sacred 
town of Troy and who wandered afterwards long and far. Many were 
those whose cities he viewed and whose minds he came to know, many 
the troubles that vexed his heart as he sailed the seas, labouring to save 
himself and to bring his comrades home. 


(Homer, The Odyssey, in Shewring, W. (trans.) (1980) Oxford: Oxford University Press) 


Tracks 27—28: Reading and critical analysis of The Odyssey of Homer, Book 1, 
lines 1—5, translated by Alexander Pope (1688-1744). 


The man for wisdom’s various arts renown’d, 
Long exercised in woes, O Muse! resound; 

Who, when his arms had wrought the destined fall 
Of sacred Troy, and razed her heaven-built wall, 
Wandering from clime to clime, observant stray’d, 
Their manners noted, and their states survey’d. 

On stormy seas unnumber’d toils he bore, 

Safe with his friends to gain his natal shore. 


(The Odyssey of Homer, in A. Pope (trans.) (1925[1725]) Oxford: Oxford University Press) 


Tracks 29-30: Reading of Derek Walcott (1993) The Odyssey: A Stage Version, 
London: Faber and Faber. 


Note on the author: Derek Walcott (b.1930 in St Lucia) is a poet and dramatist. 
His long poem Omeros celebrates Homeric themes in a Caribbean setting. A 
stage version of the Odyssey for the Royal Shakespeare Company was performed 
in Stratford in 1992. Walcott is the winner of the 1992 Nobel Prize for Literature. 


Act One: Prologue 
(Sound of surf) 


BILLY BLUE (sings) 


Gone sing *bout that man because his stories please us, 
Who saw trials and tempests for ten years after Troy. 


I’m Blind Billy Blue, my main man’s sea-smart Odysseus, 
Who the God of the Sea drove crazy and tried to destroy. 


Andra moi ennepe mousa polutropon hos mala polla ... 
The shuttle of the sea moves back and forth on this line, 


All night, like the surf, she shuttles and doesn’t fall 
Asleep, then her rosy fingers at dawn unstitch the design. 


When you hear this chord 
(Chord) 


Look for a swallow’s wings, 
A swallow arrowing seaward like a messenger 


Passing smoke-blue islands, happy that the kings 
Of Troy are going home and its ten years’ siege is over. 


So my blues drifts like smoke from the fire of that war, 
Cause once Achilles was ashes, things sure fell apart. 


Slow-striding Achilles, who put the hex on Hector 
A swallow twitters in Troy. That’s where we start. 


(Exit) 


CD2, ‘Aeschylus: Persians’ 


Cast: 

Persian Elders: 

1 John Evitts 

Z lan Masters 

3 Barry J. Gordon 
Queen Atossa ___ Elizabeth Morgan 
Messenger Leighton Pugh 
Dareios David Collings 
Xerxes Alex Hutchinson 


Music: Neil Brand 
Director and producer: David Blount 


Academic consultant: Felix Budelmann 


CD2 is part of your work for Block 2, Part 1. It contains an audio-production of 
Aeschylus’ play, Persians. The translation is by Edith Hall, and it is reprinted in 
Readings Book 1. The play is broken down into tracks as follows: 


Track 1, lines 1-149 

Track 2, lines 150—245 
Track 3, lines 246—597 
Track 4, lines 598-680 
Track 5, lines 681-851 
Track 6, lines 852—906 
Track 7, lines 907—end 


This audio-production was made specifically for our course and needed to follow 
the translation printed in Readings Book 1. Consequently the director David 
Blount was unable to make the kinds of cuts or changes to the translation which 
he might have chosen to make for a free-standing broadcast production. However, 
he had to make certain decisions because no production —audio, video or theatre — 
can avoid all interpretation. 


One particular area in which decisions had to be made was music. As discussed in 
the course material, in fifth-century BCE drama, some passages (both solo and 
choral) would have been sung to the accompaniment of an aulos player. This kind 
of performance style is difficult to reproduce today, and would certainly have a 
rather different effect on contemporary audiences who are not used to drama 
being partly spoken and partly sung. Moreover, Greek tragedy drew on particular 
kinds of ritual traditions, such as sung or chanted communal female lament 
(interestingly, transmuted into male communal lament in Persians, something 
rather unusual in real-life Athens). With such contexts alien to most modern 
spectators, a straightforward recreation of ancient musical effects would be 
impossible. 


Therefore, in this audio-production the words are spoken throughout, but music is 
used in certain places. The composer and performer of this music, Neil Brand, 
sets out below how he went about composing the music. His notes illustrate the 
sorts of challenges faced in turning ancient material into modern productions. 
Before you read his notes, you might ask yourself what sort of music you would 
find appropriate for a modern audio-production of Persians. (The issue of modern 
productions will reappear later in Block 2, in connection with Aristophanes’ 
Lysistrata). 

5 


Neil Brand’s notes on his music for Persians 


In writing this score I was principally aware of the need to help listeners to 
‘visualise’ the story. Yes, it is a story from ancient Greece; yes, it has a structure 
and intent which differs starkly from our modern dramatic fare; but the process of 
understanding the play is still reliant on the spoken word and as a modern-day 
composer I feel my responsibility is very much to the audience of today hearing 
this play for the first time. In coming to the project for the first time, the 
combination of budgetary restrictions and David Blount’s directorial 
requirements set limits to the musical framework (always a real spur to 
creativity!) and made me prioritise my goals. I could never reproduce the Greek 
theatrical experience (whatever that, musically, may have been) but I could utilise 
sounds and my long experience as a radio drama composer to bring to life some 
of the pictures embedded in the words. 


As acomposer I initially approach a work as a whole on much the same terms as 
a literary critic. What is the central idea behind the work? How does it work, this 
idea through the narrative? Where are the main plot twists? In what historic and 
geographical environments does the play take place? From this graphic analysis 
one can begin to put together the prime moments that will need music and some 
idea of what that music will be. David had set out specific points that he wanted 
covered and a visit to the studios to hear the read-through also gave me the 
chance to see where music could underscore speech, evolving with the changing 
moods. This would have the effect of turning speeches into mini-arias, operatic in 
tone but still theatrical and in keeping with the requirements of the text. 


The major problem I had to overcome as a composer, it seemed to me, was the 
unchanging nature of the narrative — the play was not a series of dramatic 
incidents but a dramatised meditation on the themes of loss, grief and regret. The 
play’s dramatic arc gave us characters that began the play supremely confident in 
the power of their armies (albeit with an undertone of concern), passed through 
the stunning shock of hearing of the armies’ destruction, and were left finally in 
the comparative tranquillity of grief, regret and self-accusation. This gave me my 
‘musical journey’. The music, like the play, constantly refers backwards and 
forwards over the characters’ early contentment to their final realisation of grief, 
objectively commenting whilst attempting to bind the whole narrative together. 


Woven through that narrative are many allusions to fate (particularly the hubris of 
Xerxes’ challenge to the gods), the tragic dimension of all Greek drama. Fate, I 
felt, should be a desert snake — when it is talked of, we hear its sinister rattle — it 
is the first sound we hear in the play. Otherwise the music supports, from moment 
to moment, the procession of powerful elements of the play — first Persia itself, 
then Xerxes striding all-powerful across the Bosphorus, then Queen Atossa, the 
messenger’s dreadful news, the rituals of grief and finally the defeated Xerxes 
himself. So the music evolves from heavy menace to percussion-driven violence, 
to thoughtful loss, to grand outpourings of grief. 


Whilst using some Eastern instruments (particularly the doholla, a drum similar 
to the tabla and the shahnai, an Arabic reed instrument) to give a specific locale, I 
wanted the evolving ‘melody of regret’ to be one which could be recognised from 
any of the last 100 years of western classical music. The themes of Persians are 
universal and whilst the Persia of yesterday is all too relevantly the Iran of today, 
I felt a mix of ‘ethnic’ instruments and the filmic breadth/English pastoral style 
(my native musical tongue) would draw fruitfully from both cultures and embrace 
the specific as well as the universal. As grief becomes solidified 1n the play I 
added a human voice — cries which have a feel of the muezzin but also sound 
distant, echoed, from another time. Finally the music grows in volume and texture 
into a grand lament of its own which takes over entirely as the play finishes. 


6 


CD3, ‘Funeral speeches ancient and modern’ 


Presenter: Lorna Hardwick 
Readers: Kevin Murphy and Leighton Pugh 
Producer: David Blount 


CD3 is part of your work for Block 2, Part 3. It starts by presenting readings of 
primary sources that support your study of the Funeral Speech (the Epitaphios 
Logos) which the Athenian historian Thucydides attributed to the Athenian leader 
Pericles. Thucydides made the occasion of the speech a major episode in his 
History of the Peloponnesian War. The speech was delivered on the occasion of 
the public funeral for those killed in action in the first year of the war between the 
Athenians and Spartans. It is important not only because of the historical context 
— it provides evidence about Athenian social and political practices and the 
establishment of a polis tradition for the honouring of the war-dead — but also for 
its subsequent influence. 


The claims made in the speech about the Athenian way of life, their cultural 
achievements, their democracy, and the rhetoric which is used to justify Athenian 
exercise of power over other states, have been widely accepted as a snapshot of 
what Athens was like at the height of its powers in the fifth century BCE. Yet, as 
Thucydides’ History shows, Pericles’ position at the time was under threat, the 
Attic countryside had been ravaged by the Spartans and those wanting peace had 
been vociferous. Furthermore, Athens was about to experience a devastating 
plague and, after various triumphs and disasters, was eventually defeated by the 
Spartans. This resulted in a temporary overthrow of the democracy at the end of 
the fifth century, and although it was soon restored and the Athenians recovered 
to some extent, they never regained their former supremacy in Greece. 


So the Funeral Speech can be analysed and interpreted from a number of 
perspectives and you will be able to work on this in Block 2. On CD3, we 
concentrate on the rhetoric of the spoken word and its impact. You will also be 
able to compare Pericles’ Funeral Speech with other ancient approaches to the 
same genre, and listen to some modern examples of public oratory in comparable 
contexts. 


The reading of Pericles’ speech is in the translation from the Greek by Richard 
Crawley, published in 1874 (there is a note on Crawley in Reading 2.9 of 
Readings Book 1). Crawley’s translation was revised by R.C. Feetham in 1903 
and has been used extensively ever since. We have chosen to use it on this course 
because of its sensitivity to the structure and nuances of Thucydides’ Greek and 
also because its slightly archaic tone usefully distances the text from the present 
day, reminding us that the ancient Greeks and their ideas often seem, 
paradoxically, to be both close to us and distant. 


After the introduction (Track 1) a reading of the whole of the Epitaphios follows. 
As you listen, notice the way in which Thucydides characteristically provides a 
very short narrative introduction and conclusion to give the episode its context 
and to locate it in the chronology of the war. Listen, too, for the words and 
phrases in which Pericles proclaims Athenian social and political values and unity 
and especially for the way he defines and proclaims this in contrast with 
‘outsiders’. Primarily these outsiders are Spartan, but can you also pick up some 
Swipes against those Athenians who were less than supportive? See what you 
think. There is detailed discussion of this in Block 2, Part 3. 


Track 1: Introduction 


Tracks 2—15: Thucydides Book 2.34—47 


Track 2: 2.34 
Track 3: 2.35 
Track 4: 2.36 
Track 5: 2.37 
Track 6: 2.38 
Track 7: 2.39 
Track 8: 2.40 
Track 9: 2.41 
Track 10: 2.42 
Track 11: 2.43 
Track 12: 2.44 
Track 13: 2.45 
Track 14: 2.46 
Track 15: 2.47 


Track 16: Introduction to Gorgias 


The next reading is from a fragmentary Funeral Speech attributed to Gorgias, the 
Sicilian rhetorician. Unlike Pericles, he was not a political leader but a travelling 
sophist, that is a teacher and speech writer, who produced both commissioned 
speeches and models which might be publicly performed to display his talents — 
perhaps you can hear some elements of this in the way tn which the speech 1s 
read. 


Gorgias first visited Athens in 427 BCE. Some critics think that Pericles’ speech 
in Thucydides and that attributed to Gorgias show similarities. Think about this 
as you listen and jot down any points that strike you. The possible comparison is 
discussed in Block 2, Section 3.3. 


Track 17: Funeral Speech attributed to Gorgias 


Track 18: Introduction to the two readings of Thucydides, Book 2.37 


On Tracks 19 and 20 you will hear an extract from Pericles’ speech in 
Thucydides read again, first from the page. This is Book 2.37. Then the passage 
will be spoken once more, by the same actor, but this time in a more obviously 
rhetorical style as performance, such as you might expect to hear in a public 
speech by a politician. Of course, we cannot assume that the style of public 
rhetoric that we might be familiar with today corresponds to that of Athenian 
public speaking and we cannot recreate for you the atmosphere and buzz of 
excitement and grief in the crowd at an open-air public funeral in a time of war. 


The aim of having the same passage read twice is a modest one — to encourage 
you to think about the effect on the listener of how the words are spoken. To help 
with this, | suggest you make a few short notes after the first reading on Track 19, 
indicating what the most effective points were and how you responded to them. 
Then listen to the second reading, on Track 20, and repeat the exercise. Finally, 
compare your two sets of notes. 


Tracks 19—20: Readings of Thucydides, Book 2.37 


Track 21: Summary 


This completes the readings from the Epitaphios Logos, Pericles’ Funeral Speech 
in Thucydides, and from the speech attributed to Gorgias. In listening and re- 
listening to these readings we hope you have been able to attune your ear to the 
effects of Greek rhetoric — the appeal to reason and emotion of the words used; 
how they are combined in the overall structure, and how they are delivered. Your 
study in Block 2 will enable you to think about the historical context of the 
speech in Thucydides, to consider its purpose and to begin to evaluate the claims 
made in it. This aspect is discussed in Block 2, Sections 3.3 and 3.4. 


Track 22: Modern speeches 


The next part of the CD introduces three speeches from the modern era, made in 
the context of public funerals or reburial. We have included these so that you can 
think about the differences and similarities between ancient and modern 
approaches to this kind of occasion, and can begin to use comparative material to 
analyse the impact of public rhetoric. You will also become aware of the 
persistence of some aspects of ancient Athenian rhetoric into modern political 
discourse. For this you will need to be quite careful in contrasting as well as 
comparing the ancient and modern texts and contexts. Differences are as 
important as similarities and each speech has its own history. 


The first speech you will hear is the Gettysburg Address, delivered by President 
Abraham Lincoln on 19 November 1863, during the American Civil War, at the 
dedication of the Gettysburg National Cemetery on the site of the battle of 
Gettysburg (which had taken place in July 1863). 


Track 23: Gettysburg Address 


Track 24: Everett’s speech 


The Gettysburg Address has become so famous as a statement of the principles of 
the Union side in the American Civil War that it is often forgotten that it was — in 
terms of length — just one part of a much longer ceremony, and furthermore that 
comparatively little attention was paid to it at the time. On Track 25 you can hear 
the opening section from the main speech of the ceremony, made by Edward 
Everett, a former president of Harvard University and a leader of the nineteenth- 
century American revival of interest in ancient Greece. Listen for the specific 
allusions to Pericles’ speech and for the differences in emphasis. Everett 
emphasises the early fifth-century battle of Marathon, partly because the dead 
were interred where they fell and partly for its associations with the idea of 
resistance to the Persians, seen as potential destroyers of Greek culture. Pericles’ 
emphasis was on the war with Sparta, although he did draw on the noble 
traditions associated with Marathon. Notice, too, in Everett’s speech that the 
values of the Athenians are taken as examples for the present. Aspects of this 
tradition are still present in public political discourse in the United States in the 
twenty-first century (including recent references in the rhetoric surrounding 
President George W. Bush’s aims to establish democracy in other states). 


The Gettysburg speeches are discussed in Block 2, Section 3.5. 


Track 25: Everett extract 


Track 26: Introduction to Ahern Speech 


Our third modern example is more recent. This is the oration made by the 
Taoiseach (Prime Minister) of the Irish Republic, Bertie Ahern, TD, on the 
occasion of the Reinterment on 14 October 2001 of the Remains of Volunteers 
executed during the War of Independence in the early part of the twentieth 
century. The official title of the speech, which is reproduced in Reading 2.19 of 
Readings Book 1, does not mention that the men were executed by the British. 


The Taoiseach’s speech was a great public occasion and was televised on RTE. 
What you will hear is the voice of the Taoiseach recorded on that occasion. The 
place, Glasnevin Cemetery, has long associations with the nationalist movement 
in Ireland and was the scene of previous nationalist funeral orations. However, as 
you will hear, this speech was a carefully calculated balancing act, referring 
specifically to ‘a unifying occasion’, distancing the executed Volunteers from the 
later terrorists and referring positively to the Good Friday Agreement of 1998 
between the governments of the Republic of Ireland and Great Britain. This 
speech is discussed in Block 2, Section 3.5. The first part of the Taoiseach’s 
speech was made in Irish and a short extract from this is included on Track 27. 
The full speech, in English, is on Track 28. 


Track 27: The beginning of Ahern’s speech in Irish 


This is an extract of the recording of Ahern’s speech. At the time of writing, the 
complete Irish text was available on the Taoiseach’s website: 
http://www.taoiseach.gov.ie (last accessed 12 September 2005). 


Track 28: Ahern’s complete speech in English 


Track 29: Introduction to the Menexenus extract 


So far, the tone of the readings has been serious, even sombre. Our last reading 
takes us back to ancient Athens and introduces a possible note of critique and 
irony. On Track 30 you will hear a short extract from the philosophical dialogue 
Menexenus, which 1s often attributed to Plato, although the authorship is far from 
certain. Menexenus was a pupil of Socrates and was one of those present during 
Socrates’ last days in prison before he was executed for impiety by the restored 
Athenian democracy in 399 BCE. The dialogue named after Menexenus is an 
example of a ‘Socratic’ dialogue: that is, a philosophical conversation in which 
Socrates is the main character and questions the views of others, rather than 
declaring his own. The effect philosophically is often to challenge conventional 
assumptions. If the same is true of the activities of the historical Socrates, then 
this may have played a part in provoking his trial and execution at the hands of 
the restored but still angry and insecure democracy. 


As you listen to the short extract, notice how the discussion of the conventions of 
public funeral speeches for the war-dead may be ironical, even an attack on 
‘spin’, and how Pericles’ speech is debunked by being attributed to his 
companion Aspasia (well educated, not Athenian and female). Since the dialogue 
was not composed until c.380 BCE, this suggests that the fame of Pericles’ oration 
had persisted long after its delivery at the end of the first year of the 
Peloponnesian War, 431/0 BCE. The historical value of the source is discussed in 
Block 2, Section 3.3. 


10 


Track 30: Menexenus/Socrates 


Track 31: Conclusion 


This ends the ‘close listening’ part of your work for the Block 2 study of Pericles’ 
Epitaphios Logos. | hope you have enjoyed experiencing something of the variety 
of content and tone in Athenian rhetoric and have been able to tease out some of 
the ways in which seemingly straightforward speech also reveals some of the 
underlying tensions in the social and political context. The examples on this CD 
also demonstrate that the significance of classical subjects is not confined to the 
study of the ancient world but has a much broader role in the arts and humanities. 
The ways in which Greek (and indeed Roman) texts and contexts have been 
interpreted, adapted and appropriated in later situations shed light on key aspects 
of culture and politics right up to the present day. 


DVD1, Section 1, ‘Course introduction’ 


Voiceover: Paula James 


Interviews with: Felix Budelmann, Chris Emlyn-Jones, James Robson, Phil 
Perkins and Val Hope 


Producer: John Wyver 


You should watch this section of the DVD during your work on the Course 
Introduction. It consists of a single track and is designed to give you an initial 
impression of the most important topics and questions that you will study in the 
course. Most of the material included here will appear in later, more narrowly 
focused, DVD sections and there is no need to identify it in detail at this stage. 


DVD1, Section 2, ‘Art and architecture of the 
Greek “Dark Age’””’ 


Presenter: Robin Osborne, Professor of Ancient History, University of 
Cambridge 


Academic consultant: Chris Emlyn-Jones 
Producer: John Wyver 


This DVD programme is the first of a series related to the various blocks of the 
course that focus on the material culture of the ancient world. It should be studied 
when you reach Block 1, Part 4, where you will find guidance on how to use it. It 
contains material that you will need to study if you decide to answer the second 
option in TMA 02 (to be completed at the end of Block 1). It is also essential for 
your work on Part 5 of Block 1, and you should study it before you reach that part 
of the block. Working on DVD1, Section 2, and its associated exercises 
represents a full week’s work, so these notes are more extensive than those for 
later blocks where the DVD material is integrated throughout the block material. 


DVD1, Section 2, consists of six tracks: a short introduction, followed by five 
tracks, each dealing with an aspect of the material culture of the period in which 
the Homeric poems were composed. The tracks are as follows: 


Introduction 
Architecture of the ‘Dark Age’ 
Votive objects 


] 

2 

3 

4 Geometric vases and society 
5 Homer and Geometric vases 
6 


Myth and narrative 


On each track Robin Osborne introduces a variety of evidence which he uses to 
focus on different aspects of the material culture of the eighth and early seventh 
century in Greece — the age of Homer. The tracks were shot at the National 
Archaeological Museum in Athens, where most of the objects which he discusses 
are housed. On Track 6 there is also a short sequence in the Museum at Eleusis (a 
small town to the north-west of Athens). 


Suggested method of study 


The tracks are thematically linked to a developing argument, but each has its own 
focus; you are therefore free to view them all in sequence or separately. You may 


12 


find it useful to run through this whole section of the DVD (it lasts in total 
approximately 40 minutes) in order to grasp the overall picture, and then return to 
the individual tracks in an order that suits you and your particular interests. You 
should also make use of the pause and forward/back controls on your player to 
study objects carefully or recap an argument. On the DVD Robin Osborne 
concentrates on a small number of objects (captioned on the screen), and you 
should give these special attention. 


Before playing any of the tracks you should read its relevant preamble printed 
below before viewing, and then refer to the questions and discussions afterwards. 
These are intended to help clarify and reinforce the argument for you and make 
you familiar with the evidence used. Please try to frame an answer to the 
questions before reading the discussions, replaying the tracks if necessary. 


Note: the discussions below are intended to function merely as aides mémoires 
and are no substitute for viewing the material on the DVD. 


References to the evidence 


The objects seen on the tracks will be listed at the end of the notes for each of 
Tracks 2—6, and can be located via the timecodes (some of the significant objects 
will be asterisked and the most significant objects will be asterisked twice). The 
timecode will refer to the first time an object appears. The objects are from the 
Athens Archaeological Museum unless otherwise stated. 


Track 2: Architecture of the ‘Dark Age’ 


This track, concerned mainly with architecture but also showing other objects, is 
concerned with the external evidence for dating the Homeric poems. 


After viewing the track 


Question 


What three objects does Robin Osborne discuss which may be significant for 
dating the Homeric poems, and why? 


Discussion 


1 Gorgon shield: mentioned in Homer Jliad 11.32-37, a scene in which the 
Greek hero Agamemnon arms himself for battle (the Gorgon was a mythical 
monster whose stare turned people to stone): 


And he took up the man-enclosing elaborate stark shield, 
a thing of splendour. There were ten circles of bronze upon it, 
and set about it were twenty knobs of tin, pale-shining, 
and in the very centre another knob of dark cobalt. 
And circled in the midst of all was the blank-eyed face of the Gorgon 
with her stare of horror, and Fear was inscribed on it, and Terror. 

(The Iliad of Homer in R. Lattimore (trans.) (1961) Chicago and London: Chicago 

University Press) 

What makes this significant is that Gorgon shields are not found in Greek art 
until the seventh century BCE, making it likely that at least this part of the 
Iliad dates from in or around the beginning of the seventh century (please 
note that this is ‘likely’, not certain: it is always possible that some earlier 
artefact has not survived). 


2 Greek dwellings: compare the remains of the palaces of Knossos and 
Mycenae with the plans and reconstructions of the ninth-century BCE 
chieftain’s house at Nichoria. 

Now read The Odyssey, 4.71—75 and 7.82—102 in your set book. Which of the 
visual sources most resembles the Homeric descriptions, and so might be 
useful for dating the poems? 


The answer is neither visual source is very close. The Homeric description is 
based on a fantasy elaboration of what the poet imagined Homeric houses to 
be like, based partly on what he knew (the simple houses of the ‘Dark Age’) 
and what he imagined (maybe a memory of what he had heard about the great 
structures of the late Bronze Age), on the assumption that, like the heroes of 
the poems, everything was bigger and better in the past. 


3 Geometric pottery: the designs on Geometric pots evolve consistently over 
time, being divided by modern art historians into Early, Middle and Late 
Geometric (with subdivisions within these categories). This gives us the only 
clear way of charting the development of settlement in the ‘Dark Age’ with 
any accuracy. This is most clearly demonstrated on one site — the Kerameikos 
cemetery at Athens, which is the most important site in Greece for pots 
associated with human burials. They do not help directly with dating Homer 
(but for indirect inferences from pots to poems, see the notes on Track 5). 


Objects seen on this track 


00:46 


02:08 
02:33 
02:46 
03:44 
04:06 


*Gorgon sculpture, Museo Archaeologico, Syracuse, seventh century 
BCE. 


Lion Gate, Mycenae, thirteenth century BCE 

Plan of a ‘village chieftains’s’ house, Nichoria, ninth century BCE 
Drawing reconstruction of a ‘Dark Age’ house, ninth century BCE 
Archaeological remains at Nichoria, ninth century BCE 


Early Geometric amphora from Kerameikos, c.900—850 BCE. 
Late Geometric amphora from Kerameikos, Kerameikos Museum. 
Museum no.576. c.760—750 BCE 


Track 3: Votive objects 


Votive objects are gifts to the gods found in graves. This track considers the 
relationship between humans and gods as revealed in the evidence of objects 
dedicated to the gods in the Kerameikos cemetery at Athens and elsewhere. 


After viewing the track 


Question 


How do the different objects shown in this track demonstrate the way in which 
humans perceived themselves, in particular in relation to the gods? 


Discussion 


| Large objects such as cauldrons are prestigious, luxury objects which 
demonstrate the wealth of the givers both to the gods and their fellow 
humans. 


2 Small figurines of horses in bronze demonstrate prestige in another way: 
compared with cattle, horses are relatively useless in everyday life; they 
signify expenditure and aristocratic display by the family of the dead person. 


3. Other objects have a different significance: bronze centaurs (mythical 
creatures, half man, half horse) suggest a leap of the imagination towards the 
construction of stories based on non-existent, mythical creatures. 


4 Figurines of humans — individually differentiated with respect to features, 
stance, hair, clothing, hand gestures — indicate an increasing awareness of 
humans as individuals in relation to the gods. 


5 Phoenician bowls are of great importance (in the poems as well as in visual 
art) showing the influence of the Near East via Phoenician traders. 


Objects seen on this track 


00:34 


01:29 


02:40 


03:00 


03:07 


03:49 


04:09 


05:49ff 


07:20 


08:19 


09:00 


Remains of the Argive Heraion Sanctuary, eighth century BCE. 
Remains of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, seventh century BCE 


Tripod bronze cauldron from Olympia, Olympia Museum. Museum 
no.B1240, eighth century BCE 


*Bronze votive horse from Olympia. Museum no.6206, eighth century 
BCE 


*Bronze votive horse from Sparta. Museum no.6555, eighth century 
BCE 


*Bronze mare and foal from Argos. Museum no.6199, eighth century 
BCE. 


*Bronze votive horse from Phocis. Museum no.15473, eighth century 
BCE 


*Bronze votive centaur from Argos. Museum no.6188, eighth century 
BCE 


**Three bronze votive human figurines from the Acropolis, Athens. 
Museum no.s 6179 from Olympia, 6613 and 6616 from the Athenian 
Acropolis, eighth century BCE 


*Phoenician bronze bowl from Olympia. Museum no.7941. Early 
seventh century BCE 


*Phoenician bronze bowl from Idaian cave, Crete. Museum no.11672. 
Early seventh century BCE 


*Ivory votive statuette from Dipylon cemetery, Athens. Museum 
no.776. Late eighth century BCE 


Track 4: Geometric vases and society 


This track concentrates chiefly on a single major object: the monumental Late 
Geometric amphora from the Dipylon cemetery at Athens (c.725 BCE). Robin 
Osborne considers what the pot and its decoration can tell us about the society 
which made and dedicated it. 


After viewing the track 


Question 


What three different aspects of late eighth-century BCE Athenian society are 
revealed by an interpretation of the Dipylon Amphora? 


15 


Discussion 


| The pot has no everyday use: it is a very large prestigious object, made as a 
marker on a grave and designed to display the wealth and status of the dead 
and their family. Originally made to hold the cremated remains of the dead, 
by the end of the eighth century BCE, when inhumation (burial) had become 
the norm, such pots were used as conspicuous markers of the graves. 


2 The ‘belly-handled amphora’ (its technical description) marked female 
graves; male graves were marked by another type of pot — monumental 
mixing-bowls for wine, known as ‘kraters’. 


3. The elaborate scene on the pot appears to enact the rites associated with 
death. If analysed, however, the composition of the pot reveals a complex 
relationship with society: in Greek funeral rites women are prominent, 
whereas on this pot most of the mourners are men. Other pots suggest that 
this and other apparently everyday scenes are far from being a simple 
reflection of society, but rather have a symbolic value reflecting a 
fictionalised community. 


Objects seen on this track 


00:25 **The Dipylon Amphora, from the Dipylon cemetery. Athens. 
Museum no.804. ¢c.725 BCE 


01:18 Cup with warriors, Kerameikos Museum. Museum no.2159. Late 
eighth century BCE 


01:24 Late Geometric amphora, Kerameikos Museum. 760—750 BCE 


02:40 *Geometric krater with funeral procession, Kerameikos Museum; 

: Museum no.990. c.740 BCE 
06:07 *Geometric amphorae, Eleusis Museum, eighth to sixth centuries BCE 
06:19 *Vase fragment with chariot and warriors. Late eighth century BCE 


06:36 **Proto-Attic krater from Thebes, with sea battle, British Museum. 
Museum no.1899.2—19.1. 735-720 BCE 


07:43 Aquatic bird amphora, Eleusis. Museum no.741, seventh century BCE 


Track 5: Homer and Geometric vases 


The possible relationship between the pots (Track 4) and Homer is discussed in 
terms of form and content. 


After viewing the track 


Question 


What relationships between pots and the Homeric poems does Robin Osborne 
suggest might be significant? 


Discussion 


An obvious connection is ‘monumentality’: just as the J/iad and the Odyssey are 
very large, possibly unique compositions, so large pots such as the Dipylon 
Amphora appear to be unique in their size and intricacy. 


These large pots are limited to a generation (750-725 BCE), after which more 
‘domesticated’ artefacts appear in the graves in which groups of (non- 
individualised) ‘citizens’ appear as soldiers or rowers. 


A possible link with Homer is the prevalence of a sequence of scenes on the pots 
in which individual elements are to be enjoyed in their own right and combined 
into a monumental whole, ‘piling up incident’, not unlike the scenes of Homeric 
‘formulaic’ composition. At the same time, in both pots and poems one scene is 
marked out from the others; we start to get the interaction between individuals; 
what looks like the depiction of an incident begins to lead to the development of a 
Story. 


Objects seen on this track 


00:54 Dipylon Amphora (see Track 4) 


01:20 *Late Geometric amphora with chariots and horses, Eleusis museum, 
early seventh century BCE 


05:34  **Hydria by the Analatos painter. Museum no.2696 (313). c.675 BCE 


Track 6: Myth and narrative 


In this final track Robin Osborne moves onwards in time to the early to middle 
seventh century BCE to look at a pot that begins to tell a story, a Proto-Attic pot (a 
development from Geometric) which appears to illustrate two popular Greek 
stories from myth and legend. 


After viewing the track 


Question 


What are the stories that the pot illustrates? How does it appear to be related to 
these stories? 


Discussion 


The Proto-Attic pot from Eleusis (found in a cemetery there) depicts, on the neck 
of the vase, a scene well-known from Homer’s Odyssey, Book 9, the blinding by 
Odysseus and his men of the Cyclops, Polyphemus, by driving a sharp spear or 
stake into his eye. 


If you have time you should compare the scene depicted on the vase with Homer's 
description in the Odyssey 9.371—400, and note similarities and differences 
between the visual and literary ‘stories’. 


Note especially Robin Osborne’s careful discussion about the possible relations 
between the two: we cannot automatically assume that the artist copied Homer 
(or, for that matter, that he was totally unaware of the poem). 


The body of the pot depicts another scene from myth, the story of the hero 
Perseus and the Gorgon Medusa. Note carefully what Robin Osborne says on this 
track about this story and its possible conceptual relation to death and burial, and 
the identity of the dead child to which the pot relates. 


Objects seen on this track 


00:36 Hydria by the Analatos painter (see Track 5) 


01:05 **Amphora by the Polyphemus painter, from the cemetery at Eleusis. 
Eleusis Museum, c.650 BCE 


17 


Further reading 


The following may be of interest to you if you have time in hand, or perhaps you 
may wish to follow up the references when the course has finished. They are not 
essential reading at this stage. 


Boardman, J. (1967) Pre-classical: From Crete to Archaic Greece, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 


Hampe, R. and Simon, E. (1981) The Birth of Greek Art, from the Mycenaean to the 
Archaic Period, New York: Oxford University Press. 


Hurwit, J.M. (1985) The Art and Culture of Early Greece, 1100-480 BC, Ithaca and 
London: Cornell University Press. 


Osborne, R. (1998) Archaic and Classical Greek Art, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 


Snodgrass, A. (1998) Homer and the Artists: Text and Picture in Early Greek Art, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


18 


DVD2, Section 1, ‘The Greek theatre and 
Persians’ 


Presenters: 


Oliver Taplin, Professor of Classical Languages and Literature, University of 
Oxford 


Edith Hall, Research Professor in Classics and Drama, Royal Holloway, 
University of London 


Oliver Taplin and Edith Hall are co-directors of the Archive of Performances 
of Greek and Roman Drama in Oxford, an interdisciplinary research project 
on the international history of ancient drama in performance 
(http://www.aperd.ox.ac.uk/). 


Academic consultant: Felix Budelmann 
Producer: John Wyver 


This section of the DVD forms part of your work for Block 2, Part 1. It consists 
of four tracks in which Oliver Taplin and Edith Hall speak about various aspects 
of the Greek theatre and Persians. The first two tracks are particularly relevant 
for the tasks you are set in Block 2. Tracks 3 and 4 are there to open up further 
perspectives and to prepare for your work on modern performances in Block 2, 
Part 4. The tracks are self-contained, and you can watch them separately. 


In the block, you are asked to use this DVD together with the Oxford Companion 
to Classical Civilization (set book), and possibly other sources, to do two short 
pieces of research. The DVD and OCCC are complementary, each covering some 
areas the other leaves to one side. As suggested in Block 2, it may be best to start 
with the DVD (especially Tracks 1 and 2). In addition, you may want to watch 
the first two tracks again after doing your work on the OCCC, since the OCCC 
provides some information (for instance on the festivals at which the plays were 
performed) that may give extra depth to the material on the DVD. 


One important aspect of this section is that it adds a visual dimension to your 
mostly text-based work in this part of the block. Visual evidence is crucial for a 
full understanding of the Greek theatre, both the theatre space and the 
performances. Unfortunately, our visual sources dating from the fifth century BCE 
are rather thin. Later sources can add useful information but need to be treated 
with care. For our purposes there are two main kinds of visual evidence: 


1 The physical remains of the Theatre of Dionysus on the slopes of the 
Acropolis in Athens 
Footage and discussion of these is provided in Track 1. The main challenge is 
that much of what we have dates from the fourth century and later. In 
particular, most of the stonework was added later. At the time Persians was 
written (472 BCE) there were only a few stone seats and there was no 
distinctly raised stage. However, the basic shape of the theatre, with a semi- 
circular seating area in the hillside, around a probably circular acting area, 
was essentially the same as survives today. A ground plan of the theatre is 
printed in Figure 2.3 in Block 2. As you listen to Oliver Taplin and Edith Hall 
on Track 1, think about the way they use the visual remains of various 
periods to talk about the early fifth-century BCE experience. 


Pots 

These are discussed in Track 2. Ceramic is durable and therefore one of our 
chief types of visual evidence for many aspects of fifth-century BCE Athenian 
culture and society. Unfortunately, only a small sample of pots clearly relates 
to the theatre, and these do not provide straightforward evidence. Artists did 
not aim to provide documentary evidence but engaged imaginatively with 
what they saw in the theatre, and sometimes blended theatre and non-theatre 
material. As a result, any conclusions drawn from pots must be tentative. 
Nevertheless, pots can give us unique access to some aspects of the fifth- 
century BCE theatre, such as masks or costumes. When you watch Track 2, 
watch out for the dates of pots (are they contemporary to Persians or not?) 
and for the way Oliver Taplin and Edith Hall use them to enrich our 
understanding of the Greek theatre (what sort of conclusions do they draw, 
and what sort of conclusions don’t they draw? how firmly do they draw 
them?). 


Track 1: Attending the theatre in Athens 


This track discusses the theatre space, the composition of the audience, and 
reasons for watching tragedies. 


See the notes above on dating the remains shown in this track. the following are 
some points of detail: 


The temple of Dionysus mentioned by Oliver Taplin at timecode 00:58 is 
located behind the acting area and slightly to the right, as seen from the 
spectators’ seats (in the shot at 00:41, roughly at the right-hand edge of the 
screen, where there is now a group of trees). 


The building in the background which Oliver Taplin discusses at timecode 
01:38 does not survive intact. Plays from late 460 BCE onwards refer 
regularly to some variety of building that would have formed the backdrop to 
the action, with a door through which characters would sometimes enter and 
exit. This building would have been placed behind the acting area, facing the 
audience, and was in the first place probably made mostly of wood. As Oliver 
Taplin points out, this building may well not have been constructed when 
Persians was first performed in 472 BCE. 


The high-backed seats in the front rows (e.g. at timecodes 04:47 and 06:01) 
are seats of honour reserved for dignitaries, such as the Priest of Dionysus. 


The quotation at timecode 08:27 is from Aristophanes’ comedy Frogs (lines 
1009-10), where ‘Euripides’ (as a character in the play) lists the 
characteristics that make a poet admirable: ‘intelligence, admonition, and that 
we make the people in the cities better’. Similar statements can be found 
elsewhere in ancient discussions of literature. 


Track 2: Actors in Greek theatre 


This track is about actors and acting in the fifth-century BCE theatre, covering 
topics such as acting styles, costumes and masks. It focuses in particular on the 
evidence from pots. The most important pots shown are as follows: 


04:05 Attic krater, known today as ‘Basle dancers’, early fifth century BCE. 


Basle, Antikenmuseum und Skulpturhalle BS415 


05:02 Attic volute krater, known today as ‘Pronomos Vase’ (after one of the 


figures on the vase), late fifth century BCE. Naples, Museo Nazionale 
3240 


20 


07:15 


07:30 
09:53 


Fourth-century BCE vase, with inscriptions ‘Persians’ and ‘Darius’. 
Naples, Museo Nazionale 3253. 


Fragmentary Attic jar, mid fifth century BCE, Corinth Museum T114 


Apulian bell krater, early fourth century BCE. Wiirzburg H5697. This 
vase was probably inspired, more or less immediately, by Aristophanes’ 
comedy Thesmophoriazusae. 


Track 3: How the plays survived 


This track moves beyond the exercise you are doing and gives a brief overview of 
how Greek tragedy, and in particular Persians, survived from the fifth century to 
the modern period. If you are interested in this topic, which is not discussed in 
any further detail in this course, you may wish to look at Garland, R. (2004) 
Surviving Greek Tragedy, London: Duckworth, Chapters 2—5. 


Details of stills: 


00:50 


01:34 


02:30 


04:02 


04:41 


06:01 


Papyrus Berlin 9875. This is a text of a piece called Persians not by 
Aeschylus, but by the late fifth-century playwright Timotheus. The 
papyrus dates from the second half of the fourth century BCE. It is 
chosen as an illustration here because it is one of the earliest substantial 
papyri to survive. We have enormous numbers of often small papyrus 
fragments of literary and non-literary texts, most of them preserved in 
the dry sands of Egypt. 


Papyrus Oxyrhynchus XXII 2334, third/fourth century CE. This is one 
of several small scraps of Aeschylus (from Seven against Thebes in this 
case) that survive on papyrus. Oxyrhynchus is a city in Egypt, where a 
large number of papyri has been found. 


Page from the manuscript Florentinus Laurentianus 32.9, kept in 
Florence. This is the most important medieval manuscript of Aeschylus, 
dating from the tenth century CE. Comparison with the papyrus 
fragment earlier on illustrates a major change in handwriting. While 
antiquity wrote exclusively in capital letters, medieval manuscripts were 
written in minuscules, saving space on the page. 


Page from Aeschyli tragoediae sex (‘Aeschylus’ six tragedies’), Venice: 
in aedibus Aldi et Andreae Socii, 1518. The ‘Aldine’ edition of 
Aeschylus was the first printed edition of his works. The Aldine Press in 
Venice, started by Aldus Manutius at end of the fifteenth century, was 
one of the most influential presses of the time. Many ancient texts were 
first printed there. The Greek fonts are clearly the precursors of fonts we 
use today, but still bear resemblance to the medieval book-hands. 


Page from Aeschyli ... tragoedize sex ... e Graeco in Latinum sermonem 
... converse, per loannem Sanravium (‘Aeschylus’ six tragedies’, 
translated from Greek into Latin, by loannes Sanravius), Basle: 
Ionannes Oporinus, 1555. This is the first translation of Persians 
(among the other surviving plays by Aeschylus) into Latin. Since Latin, 
unlike Greek, was read by all educated people at the time, it made 
Aeschylus more widely accessible. 


The Battle of Lepanto, 7th October 1571, oil on canvas, by the Italian 
painter Luca Cambiaso (1527-85). The figure in the foreground is 
Neptune/Poseidon. The Turks are fleeing from the victorious Holy 
League. This is one of several paintings of the battle of Lepanto. 


21 


Track 4: Modern productions of Persians 


This track discusses Persians in the twentieth century. It shows, among other 
things, that Persians has been performed in a range of contexts and with different 
agendas (and something similar is true for many ancient texts). This material 
cannot serve as evidence for how Persians was performed in the fifth century 
BCE, but you may want to ask yourself how engagement with twentieth-century 
performance may add to your understanding of the play. There will be more 
discussion of modern productions, with references to further sources of 
information, in Block 2, Part 4, ‘Aristophanes’ Lysistrata’. 


The footage of productions of Aeschylus’ Persians shown in this track is: 


performance footage of a production directed by Karolos Koun, recorded in 
1987. Karolos Koun (1908-87), was one of the most influential Greek theatre 
directors of the twentieth century. In 1942, he founded the Theatro Technis 
company, with which he produced, among other things, numerous ancient 
tragedies and comedies, both indoors and in open-air theatres. The Theatro 
Technis performed Persians several times, first during 1965—67, and later in 
1976 and 1987-88; 


rehearsal footage of a production directed by Peter Sellars in Edinburgh, 
1993. The new version (rather than a translation) of Persians was written by 
Peter Auletta, setting the play in modern Baghdad in the context of the 
bombing of Iraq by US forces in 1991. The production prompted strong 
opposition, especially in the USA. Peter Sellars (b.1957) is an American 
director of theatre, opera and television programmes. He produced two other 
Greek tragedies, Sophocles’ Ajax in 1986 and Euripides’ Children of 
Heracles in 2002/2003, using a cast of refugees. 


DVD2, Section 2, ‘Plan reading’ 


Voiceover: James Robson 
Academic consultants: Lisa Nevett and James Robson 
Producer: John Wyver 


As you work through Block 2, Part 2, on the Acropolis, you will need to be able 
to relate the two-dimensional plans of buildings shown in the Illustrations Book 
to the three-dimensional structures which they are designed to represent. This 
section is designed to help you do this. It consists of just one track. The aim here 
is to help you become comfortable with plan reading, not to discuss individual 
temples and their architecture. You will see images and/or plans of the following: 


The Temple of Themis at Rhamnous in north-east Attica 
The Athenian Treasury at Delphi 
The Temple of Poseidon at Sounion at the southern-most tip of Attica 


The Temple of Hera II at Paestum in southern Italy (formerly known as the 
Temple of Poseidon, but the majority of scholars now believe the temple was 
probably dedicated to Hera, as was another — smaller — temple close by) 


The Acropolis and its buildings 


Glossary of terms used in the discussion 


stylobate: the raised base of a temple 


naos (plural naoi): enclosed space inside a temple housing the cult image 


ae 


DVD2, Section 3, ‘The Acropolis and its 
buildings’ 


Voiceover: Felix Budelmann 
Academic consultants: Felix Budelmann and James Robson 
Producer: John Wyver 


This section rounds off your study of the Acropolis. It is designed to help you 
review the material you have studied and to develop a more complete visual 
understanding of the Acropolis and its buildings. 


The section introduces little new material. However, in Track 1, there is footage 
and a very brief discussion of two important Athenian sites that are little covered 
in the block: the Dipylon Gate and Kerameikos Cemetery, which you have 
already seen on DVD1, and the agora (marketplace). Even though these sites are 
not a core aspect of Block 2, we have included them because they put the 
Acropolis into context in two ways. They give you a fuller sense of Athenian 
civic sites other than the Acropolis, and they are situated on the Panathenaic Way, 
the route taken by the Panathenaic procession, ending up on the Acropolis. 
Before watching, you may want to have another look at Figure 2.12 to remind 
yourself of the topography. 


Much of the material is already familiar to you from your work on the block, and 
we give details below only of some new material. There is no exercise linked to 
this section, but you may wish to note down aspects that you find difficult and to 
look at the relevant paragraphs in the block again. 


Track 1: The Panathenaia and the Panathenaic Way 


After a brief introduction you will see remains first of the Dipylon Gate and the 
nearby Kerameikos Cemetery, and then of the agora, including the Hephaesteion. 


The vases shown briefly in the introductory part are: 


00:20 Attic black-figure amphora, c.540—530 BCE, in the style of Exekias, 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 


00:31 Attic black-figure amphora, c.535—38 BCE, by Nikosthenes, Museum of 
Cycladic and Ancient Greek Art, Athens 


00:35 Attic black-figure amphora depicting runners in a race, 600-550 BCE. 
Museum of Fine Arts, Budapest 


Track 2: The Acropolis 


This track covers: 
The Propylaea 
The temple of Athena Nike 
The statue of Athena Promachos 
The temple of Athena Polias 
The Erechtheion 
Altar of Athena 
02:59 The statue, shown here to give you a sense of what the original statue of 
Athena Promachos looked like, is a Roman first-century CE copy found 
at Herculaneum, and now in the Museo Nazionale Archeologico in 


Naples. The Promachos statue itself is lost. 
Zo 


Track 3: The Parthenon 


This track focuses on the Parthenon, its design and various kinds of statuary: the 
pediments, the metopes, the frieze, and the statue of Athena Parthenos. 


02:02 The reconstruction of the lost Athena Parthenos statue is a modern 
plaster cast (c. 1970) in the Royal Ontario Museum, museum 
no.962.228.16. 


Track 4: The Parthenon pediments and metopes 


This track looks in more detail at the two Parthenon pediments and some of the 
Parthenon metopes. This track was filmed mostly in the British Museum in 
London. 


Track 5: The Parthenon frieze 


Finally, the last track is devoted to the Parthenon frieze. This track, too, was 
filmed mostly in the British Museum in London. 


24 


