The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hecuba and other plays
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hecuba and other plays

Author: Euripides

Translator: Michael Wodhull

Editor: Henry Morley

Release date: November 26, 2025 [eBook #77336]

Language: English

Original publication: London: George Routledge & Sons, 1888

Credits: Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HECUBA AND OTHER PLAYS ***




[Illustration: MORLEY’S UNIVERSAL LIBRARY]

                             Ballantyne Press
                        BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO.
                           LONDON AND EDINBURGH




                                  HECUBA

                             _AND OTHER PLAYS_

                                    BY
                                 EURIPIDES

                     TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE BY
                              MICHAEL WODHULL

                  _WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY HENRY MORLEY_
                 LL.D., PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE AT
                        UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON

                                  LONDON
                         GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS
                          BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
                           GLASGOW AND NEW YORK
                                   1888

                   PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO.
                           LONDON AND EDINBURGH




MORLEY’S UNIVERSAL LIBRARY.


     1. _Sheridan’s Plays._
     2. _Plays from Molière._ By English Dramatists.
     3. _Marlowe’s Faustus_ and _Goethe’s Faust_.
     4. _Chronicle of the Cid._
     5. _Rabelais’ Gargantua_ and the _Heroic Deeds of Pantagruel_.
     6. _Machiavelli’s Prince._
     7. _Bacon’s Essays._
     8. _Defoe’s Journal of the Plague Year._
     9. _Locke on Civil Government and Filmer’s “Patriarcha.”_
    10. _Butler’s Analogy of Religion._
    11. _Dryden’s Virgil._
    12. _Scott’s Demonology and Witchcraft._
    13. _Herrick’s Hesperides._
    14. _Coleridge’s Table-Talk._
    15. _Boccaccio’s Decameron._
    16. _Sterne’s Tristram Shandy._
    17. _Chapman’s Homer’s Iliad._
    18. _Mediæval Tales._
    19. _Voltaire’s Candide_, and _Johnson’s Rasselas_.
    20. _Jonson’s Plays and Poems._
    21. _Hobbes’s Leviathan._
    22. _Samuel Butler’s Hudibras._
    23. _Ideal Commonwealths._
    24. _Cavendish’s Life of Wolsey._
    25 & 26. _Don Quixote._
    27. _Burlesque Plays and Poems._
    28. _Dante’s Divine Comedy._ LONGFELLOW’S Translation.
    29. _Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield, Plays, and Poems._
    30. _Fables and Proverbs from the Sanskrit._ (_Hitopadesa._)
    31. _Lamb’s Essays of Elia._
    32. _The History of Thomas Ellwood._
    33. _Emerson’s Essays, &c._
    34. _Southey’s Life of Nelson._
    35. _De Quincey’s Confessions of an Opium-Eater, &c._
    36. _Stories of Ireland._ By Miss EDGEWORTH.
    37. _Frere’s Aristophanes: Acharnians, Knights, Birds._
    38. _Burke’s Speeches and Letters._
    39. _Thomas à Kempis._
    40. _Popular Songs of Ireland._
    41. _Potter’s Æschylus._
    42. _Goethe’s Faust: Part II._ ANSTER’S Translation.
    43. _Famous Pamphlets._
    44. _Francklin’s Sophocles._
    45. _M. G. Lewis’s Tales of Terror and Wonder._
    46. _Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation._
    47. _Drayton’s Barons’ Wars, Nymphidia, &c._
    48. _Cobbett’s Advice to Young Men._
    49. _The Banquet of Dante._
    50. _Walker’s Original._
    51. _Schiller’s Poems and Ballads._
    52. _Peele’s Plays and Poems._
    53. _Harrington’s Oceana._
    54. _Euripides: Alcestis and other Plays._
    55. _Praed’s Essays._
    56. _Traditional Tales._ ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.
    57. _Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity. Books I.-IV._
    58. _Euripides: The Bacchanals and other Plays._
    59. _Izaak Walton’s Lives._
    60. _Aristotle’s Politics._
    61. _Euripides: Hecuba and other Plays._

“Marvels of clear type and general neatness.”—_Daily Telegraph._




INTRODUCTION.


We left the history of the House of Tantalus with a reference to Helen,
as we find her in the translated play which is among those which here
complete the collection of the extant works of Euripides.

Menelaus sent ambassadors to Troy to demand back Helen, his wife, whom
Paris had carried off. The counsels of Antenor were set aside at Troy,
by the persuasions of Paris that gave occasion to the Siege of Troy.
Agamemnon, on the throne of the deposed Thyestes, had extended his
dominion. Homer gave him command over a hundred ships in the expedition
against Troy. Some were from Mycene, which although but six or seven
miles from Argos had been capital of a separate kingdom until it was
reunited to Argos after the defeat and death of Eurystheus; and when
Agamemnon succeeded his father Atreus, he enlarged and beautified Mycene.
Twenty-eight unsuccessful suitors of Helen were summoned by Menelaus to
contribute aid, and under command of the strongest of the confederates,
Agamemnon—who was the brother of Menelaus, and who then had by his wife
Clytemnestra three daughters, Iphigenia, Chrysothemis, and Electra, also
one son, Orestes, then an infant—the expedition sailed for Troy.

But first, when the confederate fleets met as agreed, in the haven of
Aulis they were stayed by a dead calm. Guidance was sought from the
Oracle, and the soothsayer Calchas reminded Agamemnon of a vow made in
the year of Iphigenia’s birth that he would sacrifice to Diana the most
beautiful production of the year. That was his daughter, Iphigenia,
whom now Diana claimed. The fleet would remain bound in Aulis until
the sacrifice of Iphigenia. The story of the sacrifice, of the anger
of the maiden’s mother Clytemnestra, and her lover Achilles, is told
by Euripides in his “Iphigenia in Aulis.” The Goddess in the act of
sacrifice miraculously substituted a hind for the daughter, whom she
wafted in a cloud to her temple among the Scythians at Tauris, where she
became a Priestess, and where it was the custom of the barbarous people
to sacrifice every Greek who landed on their shores.

In the siege of Troy, Paris was slain by the arrows of Philoctetes. Helen
then married his brother Deiphobus, whom she betrayed to the Greeks. When
she came again into the hands of Menelaus, he was soon reconciled to her.
In returning from the ten years’ siege of Troy, many of the companions
of Agamemnon were lost by wreck on the coast of Eubœa, where the father
of Palamedes, to avenge the unjust killing of his son in the camp of the
Greeks, had set up false lights. Agamemnon came safely to Argos with the
captive prophetess Cassandra, whom he intended for himself. This was
a new affront to Clytemnestra; who remembered the murder of her first
husband Tantalus and her first infant, who remembered also the sacrifice
of Iphigenia, and who had found a paramour in Ægisthus, son of Thyestes.
Clytemnestra murdered Agamemnon with an axe as he was coming out of the
bath, and then married Ægisthus, who took Agamemnon’s throne.

The young Orestes was saved from his stepfather by a faithful servant,
who carried him to Phocis, and there put him under the protection of
Strophius. Electra remained at Argos and was married to a peasant, lest a
husband powerful in the State should help to restore to their birthrights
the children of Agamemnon.

When Orestes had passed out of childhood, he went for guidance to the
Oracle of Apollo at Delphi, and was directed to avenge the murder of his
father. He went then, with his inseparable friend Pylades, in disguise to
Argos, and was received in a cottage on the boundary of Argos, by Electra
and her peasant husband. He learnt that the peasant, strongly attached to
the family of Agamemnon, had cancelled the wrong intended by Ægisthus,
and had never claimed rights of a husband. Electra was still a maiden
princess. Brother and sister then devised and carried out a plan for the
killing of their mother Clytemnestra and Ægisthus.

But when the hands of Orestes were stained with his mother’s blood, the
Furies rose from Hell, and drove him to distraction. Six days after the
murder of Clytemnestra, the citizens of Argos met to pass sentence on
Orestes and Electra. Menelaus after a voyage from Troy of seven years’
long delays, then landed at Nauplia near Argos, and would have helped
his nephew Orestes; but he gave up Orestes and Electra to the people of
Argos upon being told by Tyndarus that if he interfered he should never
return to Sparta. The Council of Argos gave leave to Orestes and Electra
to carry out upon themselves its sentence of death. After consulting with
Pylades they resolved to kill Helen and seize their uncle’s one daughter,
Hermione, as hostage. Helen had vanished; Menelaus breathed revenge;
Apollo descended to save Orestes from his uncle, and from the people, by
declaring that Orestes had done what the gods required. But Apollo bade
him cleanse away pollution of his mother’s blood by a year’s banishment,
after which he was to submit himself to the judgment of the Areopagus at
Athens.

Before the Areopagus one of the Furies was his accuser, Apollo witnessed
in his favour. The votes of the Court were equal, and Athené gave the
casting vote for his acquittal. But still the Furies were implacable,
and Orestes, again appealing to Apollo’s Oracle, was ordered to bring
the statue of Diana from Tauris to Athens. Orestes sailed upon this
mission with Pylades, whom he had affianced to his sister Electra. When
the friends landed on the coast of Tauris, the barbarous people seized
them and they were carried to Iphigenia to be sacrificed according to
the custom of the land. When on the point of being sacrificed, discovery
was made, and, with help of Minerva, not only the image of the goddess
Diana, but also Iphigenia her priestess, was conveyed to Athens, in whose
territories, at Brauronia, Iphigenia remained priestess until her death.

Meanwhile Menelaus had married his only daughter, Hermione, to
Neoptolemus, the son of Achilles. Neoptolemus, who had offended Apollo
by making the god answerable for the death of Achilles, went to Delphi
to appease his wrath. Orestes, who sought Hermione for wife, went also
to Delphi and persuaded the people there that Neoptolemus sought plunder
of the temple. Neoptolemus was, therefore, murdered by the people of
Delphi, as he was going unarmed to the temple to propitiate the god. Then
Orestes carried off Hermione, and married her, at the same time when his
sister Electra was married to Pylades. The plays of Euripides here leave
Orestes; ruler on the throne of Agamemnon, reconciled to Menelaus, and
married to Hermione, through whom, by right of her mother Helen and her
father Menelaus, he may hope to bring also under his rule the dominions
of Sparta.

Here ends an abstract of an abstract of the History of the House of
Tantalus, as given by Michael Wodhull, Esq., to show the relations to
each other of the stories upon which Euripides based many of his plays.

This volume completes our set of English versions of all extant plays of
Euripides.

                                                                     H. M.

_April 1888_




TO THE READERS OF THE UNIVERSAL LIBRARY.


The next volume of this Library, published in May 1888, will complete our
household edition of Rabelais with the Sequel to Pantagruel. This will
be followed in June by “A Miscellany” of short works of special interest
taken from different periods of English life. The sixty-three volumes of
the Universal Library, re-arranged in historical order, will then form
a completed series, and the supply of standard literature in shilling
monthly volumes will be left to other editors whose good work in this
direction has been called into existence by the success of the Universal
Library, which on its first appearance broke new ground.

The work done in these volumes will be continued, without change of aim,
in a new series that has been planned to permit issue of large books
without the crowding of type which, in this series, has been now and
then found necessary. In the New Series, there will be a complete change
of form. Substantial and handsome volumes of the best literature will
be published in alternate months at a price that will add not more than
three shillings to the present annual cost of “The Universal Library.”
The name of the new Library will change from the Universal to the
Particular. Its books may be named from their _habitat_, and they will
usually be edited where the eye raised from the paper and ink rests upon
Carisbrooke Castle.

                            THE FIRST VOLUME OF
                       Morley’s Carisbrooke Library
            _Will be published on the First of October, 1888_.

                                                                     H. M.




EURIPIDES.




HECUBA.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    POLYDORE’S GHOST.
    HECUBA.
    CHORUS OF CAPTIVE TROJAN DAMES.
    POLYXENA.
    ULYSSES.
    FEMALE ATTENDANT OF HECUBA.
    AGAMEMNON.
    POLYMESTOR.
    TALTHYBIUS.


SCENE.—THE THRACIAN CHERSONESUS.

THE GHOST OF POLYDORE.

    Leaving the cavern of the dead, and gates
    Of darkness, where from all the gods apart
    Dwells Pluto, come I Polydore, the son
    Of Hecuba from royal Cisseus sprung,
    And Priam, who, when danger threatened Troy,
    Fearing his city by the Grecian arms
    Would be laid low in dust, from Phrygia’s realm
    In privacy conveyed me to the house
    Of Polymestor, of his Thracian friend,
    Who tills the Chersonesus’ fruitful soil,
    Ruling a nation famed for generous steeds;
    But secretly, with me, abundant gold
    My father sent, that his surviving children
    Might lack no sustenance, if Ilion’s walls
    Should by the foe be levelled with the ground.
    I was the youngest of all Priam’s sons,
    By stealth he therefore sent me from the realm;
    Nor could my feeble arm sustain the shield,
    Or launch the javelin; but while yet entire
    Each ancient landmark on our frontiers stood,
    The turrets of the Phrygian state remained
    Unshaken, and my brother Hector’s spear
    Prospered in battle; nurtured by the man
    Of Thrace, my father’s friend, I, wretched youth,
    Grew like a vigorous scion. But when Troy,
    When Hector failed, when my paternal dome
    Was from its basis rent, and Priam’s self,
    My aged father, at the altar bled
    Which to the gods his pious hands had reared,
    Butchered by curst Achilles’ ruthless son;
    Me, his unhappy guest, my father’s friend
    Slew for the sake of gold, and having slain,
    Plunged me into the sea, that he might keep
    Those treasures in his house. My breathless corse,
    In various eddies by the rising waves
    Of ocean tost, lies on the craggy shore,
    Unwept, unburied. But by filial love
    For Hecuba now prompted, I ascend
    A disembodied ghost, and thrice have seen
    The morning dawn, to Chersonesus land,
    Since my unhappy mother came from Troy.
    But all the Grecian army, in their ships,
    Here anchoring on this coast of Thrace remain
    Inactive; for appearing on his tomb
    Achilles, Peleus’ son, restrained the troops,
    Who homeward else had steered their barks, and claims
    Polyxena my sister, as a victim
    Most precious at his sepulchre to bleed;
    And her will he obtain, nor will his friends
    Withhold the gift; for fate this day decrees
    That she shall die: my mother must behold
    Two of her slaughtered children’s corses, mine,
    And this unhappy maid’s—that in a tomb
    I may be lodged, where the firm beach resists
    The waves, I to her servant will appear,
    Since from the powers of hell I have obtained
    The privilege of honourable interment,
    And that a mother’s hand these rites perform:
    I shall accomplish what my soul desired.
    But on the aged Hecuba’s approach,
    Far hence must I retreat; for from the tent
    Of Agamemnon she comes forth, alarmed
    By my pale spectre. O my wretched mother,
    How art thou torn from princely roofs to view
    This hour of servitude! what sad reverse
    Of fortune! some malignant god hath balanced
    Thy present misery ’gainst thy former bliss.

                                                    [_Exit._

HECUBA, _attended by_ TROJAN DAMSELS.

    HEC. Forth from these doors, ye gentle virgins, lead me,
    A weak old woman: O ye nymphs of Troy,
    Support your fellow-servant, once your queen
    Bear me along, uphold my tottering frame,
    And take me by this aged hand; your arm
    Shall be my staff to lean on, while I strive
    My tardy pace to quicken. O ye lightnings
    Of Jove, O Night in tenfold darkness wrapt,
    By such terrific phantoms from my couch
    Why am I scared? Thou venerable earth,
    Parent of dreams that flit on raven wing;
    The vision I abhor, which I in sleep
    This night have seen, relating to my son,
    Who here is fostered in the Thracian realm,
    And to Polyxena my dearest daughter;
    For I too clearly saw and understood
    The meaning of that dreadful apparition;
    Ye tutelary gods of this domain,
    Preserve the only anchor of our house,
    My son, who dwells in Thracian fields, o’erspread
    With snow, protected by his father’s friend.
    Some fresh event awaits us, and ere long
    By accents most unwelcome shall the ear
    Of wretchedness be wounded: till this hour,
    By such incessant horrors, such alarms,
    My soul was never seized. Where shall I view
    The soul of Helenus, on whom the god
    Bestowed prophetic gifts, ye Phrygian maids?
    Where my Cassandra to unfold the dream?
    With bloody fangs I saw a wolf, who slew
    A dappled hind, which forcibly he tore
    From these reluctant arms, and what increased
    My fears, was this—Achilles’ spectre stalked
    Upon the summit of his tomb, and claimed
    A gift, some miserable Trojan captive.
    You therefore I implore, ye gods, avert
    Such doom from my loved daughter.

CHORUS, HECUBA.

    CHOR.                              I to thee,
    To thee, O Hecuba, with breathless speed,
    Fly from the tents of our imperious lords,
    Where I by lot have been assigned, and doomed
    To be a slave, driven by the pointed spear
    From Troy; by their victorious arms the Greeks
    Have made me captive: nothing can I bring,
    Thy sorrows to alleviate; but to thee
    Laden with heaviest tidings am I come
    The herald of affliction. For ’tis said,
    Greece in full council hath resolved thy daughter
    A victim to Achilles shall be given.
    The warrior mounting on his tomb, thou know’st,
    Appeared in golden armour, and restrained
    The fleet just ready to unfurl its sails,
    Exclaiming, “Whither would ye steer your course,
    Ye Greeks, and leave no offering on my grave?”
    A storm of violent contention rose,
    And two opinions in the martial synod
    Of Greece went forth; the victim, some maintained,
    Ought on the sepulchre to bleed, and some
    Such offering disapproved. But Agamemnon,
    Who shares the bed of the Prophetic Dame,
    Espoused thy interest; while the sons of Theseus,
    Branches from the Athenian root, discussed
    The question largely in each point of view,
    But in the same opinion both concurred,
    And said that never should Cassandra’s love
    To great Achilles’ valour be preferred:
    Equally balanced the debate still hung,
    When he, that crafty orator, endued
    With sweetest voice, the favourite of the crowd,
    Laertes’ son, persuaded all the host,
    Not to reject the first of Grecian chiefs,
    And yield the preference to a victim slave:
    Lest some vindictive ghost, before the throne
    Of Proserpine arising, might relate
    How Greece, unmindful of her generous sons,
    Who nobly perished for their native land,
    From Ilion’s fields departed. In a moment
    Ulysses will come hither, from thy breast,
    And aged arms to drag the tender maid.
    But to the temples, to the altars, go,
    In suppliant posture clasp Atrides’ knees,
    Invoke the gods of heaven and hell beneath,
    For either thou wilt by thy prayers avert
    Thy daughter’s fate, else must thou at the tomb
    Behold the virgin fall distained with gore,
    And gushing from her neck a crimson stream.

    HEC. Wretch that I am! ah me! what clamorous sounds,
    What words, what plaints, what dirges shall I find,
    Expressive of the anguish which I feel?
    Opprest by miserable old age, bowed down
    Under a load of servitude too heavy
    To be endured: what sanctuary remains,
    What valiant race, what city will protect me?
    The hoary Priam is no more, my sons
    Are now no more. Or to this path, or that,
    Shall I direct my steps? or whither go?
    Where shall I find some tutelary god?
    Ye Phrygian captives, messengers of ill,
    O ye who with unwelcome tidings fraught,
    Come hither, ye have ruined me. The orb
    Of day shall never rise to fill this breast
    With any comfort more. Ye luckless feet,
    Bear an infirm old woman to the tent
    Of our captivity. Come forth, my daughter,
    Come forth and listen to thy mother’voice,
    That thou may’st know the rumour I have heard,
    In which thy life is interested.

POLYXENA, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    POLYX.                          O mother,
    What mean you by those shrieks? what fresh event
    Proclaiming, from my chamber, like a bird,
    Have you constrained me, urged by fear, to speed
    My flight?

    HEC.      Ah, daughter!

    POLYX.                  With foreboding voice,
    Why do you call me? these are evil omens.

    HEC. Alas! thy life, Polyxena.

    POLYX.                        Speak out,
    Nor aggravate the horrors yet untold
    By long suspense. I fear, O mother, much
    I fear. What mean those oft repeated groans?

    HEC. Thou child of a most miserable mother!

    POLYX. Why speak you thus?

    HEC.                      The Greeks, with one consent,
    Resolve that on the tomb of Peleus’ son
    Thou shalt be sacrificed.

    POLYX.                    What boundless woes
    Are these which to your daughter you announce!
    Yet, O my mother, with the tale proceed.

    HEC. Of a most horrible report I speak,
    Which says, that, by the suffrage of the Greeks,
    It is resolved to take away thy life.

    POLYX. O, my unhappy mother, doomed to suffer
    Wrongs the most dreadful, doomed to lead a life
    Of utter wretchedness: what grievous curse,
    Such as no language can express, on you
    Hath some malignant demon hurled! no more
    Can I, your daughter, share the galling yoke
    Of servitude with your forlorn old age;
    For like some lion’s whelp, or heifer bred
    Upon the mountains, hurried from your arms
    Shall you behold me, and with severed head
    Consigned to Pluto’s subterraneous realms
    Of darkness, there among the silent dead,
    Wretch that I am, shall I be laid. These tears
    Of bitter lamentation I for you,
    For you, O mother, shed; but my own life
    I heed not, nor the shame, nor fatal stroke,
    For I in death a happier lot obtain.

    CHOR. To thee, O Hecuba, with hasty step
    Behold Ulysses some new message brings.

ULYSSES, HECUBA, POLYXENA, CHORUS.

    ULY. Though I presume the counsels of our troops
    And their decision are already known
    To thee, O woman, yet must I repeat
    Th’ unwelcome tidings; at Achilles’ tomb,
    Polyxena, thy daughter, have the Greeks
    Resolved to slay; me to attend the virgin
    Have they commanded: but Achilles’ son
    Is at the altar destined to preside,
    And be the priest. Know’st thou thy duty then?
    Constrain us not to drag her from those arms
    With violence, nor strive with me; but learn
    The force of thy inevitable woes:
    For there is wisdom, e’en when we are wretched,
    In following reason’s dictates.

    HEC.                            Now, alas!
    It seems a dreadful struggle is at hand,
    With groans abounding and unnumbered tears.
    I died not at the time I ought to die,
    Neither did Jove destroy me; he still spares
    My life, that I may view fresh woes, yet greater,
    Wretch that I am, than all my former woes.
    But if a slave, who not with bitter taunt,
    Or keen reproach, her questions doth propose,
    Might speak to freemen, now ’tis time for you
    To cease, and give me audience while I ask——

    ULY. Allowed, proceed; for I without reluctance
    Will grant thee time.

    HEC.                  Remember you when erst
    You came to Troy a spy, in tattered garb
    Disguised, and from your eyes upon your beard
    Fell tears extorted by the dread of death?

    ULY. I well remember: for by that event
    My inmost heart was touched.

    HEC.                        But Helen knew you,
    And told me only.

    ULY.              I can ne’er forget
    Into what danger I was fallen.

    HEC.                          My knees
    You in a lowly posture did embrace.

    ULY. And to thy garment clung with faltering hand.

    HEC. At length I saved and from our land dismissed you.

    ULY. Hence I the solar beams yet view.

    HEC.                                  What language
    Did you then hold, when subject to my power?

    ULY. Full many were the words which I devised
    To save my life.

    HEC.            Doth not your guilt appear
    From your own counsels? Though your tongue avows
    The generous treatment you from me received
    No benefit on me do you confer,
    But strive to harm me. O ungrateful race
    Of men, who aim at popular applause
    By your smooth speeches; would to Heaven I ne’er
    Had known you, for ye heed not how ye wound
    Your friends, whene’er ye can say ought to win
    The crowd. But what pretence could they devise
    For sentencing this virgin to be slain?
    Are they constrained by fate, with human victims,
    To drench the tomb on which they rather ought
    To sacrifice the steer? or doth Achilles
    Demand her life with justice, to retaliate
    Slaughter on them who slaughtered? But to him
    Hath she done nought injurious. He should claim
    Helen as victim at his tomb, for she
    His ruin caused by leading him to Troy.
    If it was needful that some chosen captive
    Distinguished by transcendent charms should die,
    We were not meant; for the perfidious daughter
    Of Tyndarus is most beauteous, and her crimes
    To ours at least are equal. Justice only
    In this debate supports me: hear how large
    The debt which ’tis your duty to repay
    On my petition: you confess you touched
    My hand, and these my aged cheeks, in dust
    Grovelling a suppliant; yours I now embrace,
    From you the kindness which I erst bestowed
    Again implore, and sue to you: O tear not
    My daughter from these arms, nor slay the maid:
    Sufficient is the number of the slain.
    In her I yet rejoice, in her forget
    My woes; she, for the loss of many children,
    Consoles me, I in her a country find,
    A nurse, a staff, a guide. The mighty ought not
    To issue lawless mandates, nor should they,
    On whom propitious fortunes now attend,
    Think that their triumphs will for ever last:
    For I was happy once, but am no more,
    My bliss all vanished in a single day.
    Yet, O my friend, revere and pity me,
    Go to the Grecian host, admonish them
    How horrible an action ’twere to slay
    These captive women whom at first ye spared,
    And pitied when ye dragged them from the altars.
    For by your laws ’tis equally forbidden
    To spill the blood of freemen, or of slave.
    Although you weakly argue, will your rank
    Convince them: for the self-same speech, when uttered
    By the ignoble, and men well esteemed,
    Comes not with equal force.

    CHOR.                      The human soul
    Is not so flinty as to hear the woes
    And plaintive strains thou lengthen’st out, nor shed
    The sympathizing tear.

    ULY.                  To me attend,
    O Hecuba, nor through resentment deem
    That from a foe such counsels can proceed:
    I am disposed to save thee, and now hold
    No other language: but will not deny
    What I to all have said; since Troy is taken,
    On the first warrior of the host who asks
    A victim, should thy daughter be bestowed.
    The cause why many cities are diseased
    Is this: the brave and generous man obtains
    No honourable distinction to exalt him
    Above the coward. But from us, O woman,
    Achilles claims such homage, who for Greece
    Died nobly. Is not this a foul reproach,
    If, while our friends yet live, we seek their aid,
    But after death ungratefully forget
    Past services? Should armed bands once more
    Assemble, and renew the bloody strife,
    Will not some hardy veteran thus exclaim:
    “Shall we go forth to battle, or indulge
    The love of life, now we have seen the dead
    Obtain no honours?” While from day to day
    I live, though I have little, yet that little
    For every needful purpose will suffice.
    But may conspicuous trophies o’er my grave
    Be planted, for such tribute to my name
    Will last to after-ages. If thou call
    Thy sufferings piteous, hear what in reply
    We have to urge; amidst the Grecian camp
    Are many aged dames, as miserable
    As thou art, with full many a hoary sire,
    And weeping bride, torn from her valiant lord,
    O’er whose remains hath Ida’s dust been strewn.
    Support thy woes: if with mistaken zeal
    We have resolved to honour the deceased,
    Our crime is ignorance: but ye barbarians
    Pay no distinction to your friends, no homage
    To the illustrious dead; hence Greece prevails;
    But ye from your pernicious counsels reap
    The bitter fruits they merit.

    CHOR.                        Ah, what ills
    Ever attend the captive state, subdued
    By brutal violence, and forced t’ endure
    Unseemly wrongs.

    HEC.            Those words I vainly spoke
    Thy slaughter to avert, in air were lavished;
    But, O my daughter, if thy power exceed
    Thy mother’s, like the nightingale send forth
    Each warbled note, to save thy life, excite,
    By falling at his knees, Ulysses’ pity,
    And on this ground, because he too hath children,
    Entreat him to compassionate thy doom.

    POLYX. I see thee, O Ulysses, thy right hand
    Beneath thy robe concealing, see thee turn
    Thy face away, lest I should touch thy beard.
    Be of good cheer; I’ll not call down the wrath
    Of Jove who guards the suppliant, but will follow
    Thy steps, because necessity ordains
    And ’tis my wish to die; if I were loth,
    I should appear to be an abject woman,
    And fond of life: but what could lengthened life
    Avail to me, whose father erst was lord
    Of the whole Phrygian realm? Thus first I drew
    My breath beneath the roofs of regal domes;
    Then was I nurtured with the flattering hope
    That I should wed a monarch, and arrive
    At the proud mansion of some happy youth.
    Ill-fated princess, thus I stood conspicuous
    Amid the dames and brightest nymphs of Troy,
    In all but immortality a goddess;
    But now am I a slave, and the first cause
    Which makes me wish to die, is that abhorred
    Unwonted name; else some inhuman lord
    With gold perchance might purchase me, the sister
    Of Hector, and full many a valiant chief,
    Might make me knead the bread, and sweep the floor,
    And ply the loom, and pass my abject days
    In bitterness of woe: some servile mate
    Might bring dishonour to my bed, though erst
    I was deemed worthy of a sceptred king:
    Not thus. These eyes shall to the last behold
    The light of freedom. O ye shades receive
    A princess. Lead me on then, O Ulysses,
    And as thou lead’st despatch me, for no hope,
    No ground for thinking, I shall e’er be happy,
    Can I discern: yet hinder not by word
    Or deed the steadfast purpose I have formed;
    But, O my mother, in this wish concur
    With me, that I may die ere I endure
    Such wrongs as suit not my exalted rank.
    For whosoe’er hath not been used to taste
    Of sorrow, bears indeed the galling yoke,
    Yet is he grieved, when he to such constraint
    Submits his neck: but they who die may find
    A bliss beyond the living; for to live
    Ignobly were the utmost pitch of shame.

    CHOR. A great distinction, and among mankind
    The most conspicuous, is to spring from sires
    Renowned for virtue; generous souls hence raise
    To heights sublimer an ennobled name.

    HEC. Thou, O my daughter, well indeed hast spoken;
    Yet these exalted sentiments of thine
    To me will cause fresh grief; but, if the son
    Of Peleus must be gratified, and Greece
    Avoid reproach, Ulysses, slay not her,
    But me, conducting to Achilles’ tomb,
    Transpierce with unrelenting hand. I bore
    Paris, whose shafts the son of Thetis slew.

    ULY. Not thee for victim, O thou aged dame,
    But her, Achilles’ spectre hath demanded.

    HEC. Yet slay me with my daughter; so shall earth,
    And the deceased who claims these hateful rites,
    A twofold portion drink of human gore.

    ULY. Enough in her of victims; let no more
    Be added: would to Heaven we were not bound
    To offer up this one!

    HEC.                  The dread behests
    Of absolute necessity require,
    That with my daughter I should die.

    ULY.                                What mean’st thou?
    I know no lord to counteract my will.

    HEC. Her, as the ivy clings around the oak,
    Will I embrace.

    ULY.            Not if to wiser counsels
    Thou yield just deference.

    HEC.                      I will ne’er consent
    My daughter to release.

    ULY.                    Nor will I go,
    And leave her here.

    POLYX.              Attend to me, my mother,
    And, O thou offspring of Laertes, treat
    The just emotions of parental wrath
    With greater mildness. But, O hapless woman,
    Contend not with our conquerors. Would you fall
    Upon the earth and wound your aged limbs,
    Thrust from me forcibly, by youthful arms
    Torn with disgrace away? Provoke not wrongs
    Unseemly; O, my dearest mother, give
    That much-loved hand, and let me join my cheek
    To yours; for I no longer shall behold
    The radiant orb of yonder sun. Now take
    A last farewell, O you who gave me birth;
    I to the shades descend.

    HEC.                    But I the light
    Am doomed to view, and still remain a slave.

    POLYX. Unwedded, reft of promised bridal joys.

    HEC. Thou, O my daughter, claim’st the pitying tear:
    But I am a most miserable woman.

    POLYX. There shall I sleep among the realms beneath,
    From you secluded.

    HEC.              What resource, alas!
    For me, the wretched Hecuba is left?
    Where shall I finish this detested life?

    POLYX. Born free, I die a slave.

    HEC.                            I too, bereft
    Of all my children.

    POLYX.              What commands to Hector,
    Or to your aged husband, shall I bear?

    HEC. Tell them I of all women am most wretched.

    POLYX. Ye paps which sweetly nourished me——

    HEC.                                        Alas!
    My child’s untimely miserable fate.

    POLYX. Farewell, my mother, and my dear Cassandra.

    HEC. To others in that language speak; be theirs
    The happiness thy mother cannot taste.

    POLYX. And thou, my brother Polydore, who dwell’st
    Among the Thracians, famed for generous steeds——

    HEC. If yet he live; but this I greatly doubt,
    Because I am in all respects so wretched.

    POLYX. He lives, and when the hour of death is come,
    Will close your eyes.

    HEC.                  I’m prematurely dead
    While yet alive, bowed down to earth by woe.

    POLYX. Now bear me hence, Ulysses, o’er my face
    Casting a veil: for ere I at the altar
    Am slain, this heart is melted by the plaints
    Of my dear mother, and my tears augment
    Her sorrows. O thou radiant light; for still
    Am I permitted to invoke thy name,
    But can enjoy thee only till I meet
    The lifted sword, and reach Achilles’ tomb.

                           [_Exeunt_ ULYSSES _and_ POLYXENA.

    HEC. I faint, my limbs are all unnerved; return,
    My daughter, let me touch that hand once more,
    Leave me not childless. O, my friends, I perish;
    Ah, would to Heaven I could see Spartan Helen,
    In the same state, that sister to the sons
    Of Jove, for by her beauteous eyes was Troy,
    That prosperous city, with disgrace o’erthrown.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          Ye breezes, who the ships convey,
          That long becalmed at anchor lay,
              Nor dared to quit the strand;
          As the swift keel divides the wave,
          Say whither am I borne a slave,
          Ordained to tread the Doric land,
          Or Phthia, where beset with reeds,
        Apidanus, the sire of limpid rills,
          Winding a-down the channelled hills,
              Waters the fruitful meads?

    I. 2.

          Or to that isle, with dashing oar
          Impelled, shall I my woes deplore,
              And on the sacred earth,
          Where first the palm and laurel rose,
          Memorials of Latona’s throes,
          Which to the twins divine gave birth,
          Teach the harmonious strain to flow;
        With Delos’ nymphs Diana’s praise resound,
          Her hair with golden fillet bound,
              And never-erring bow?

    II. 1.

          Or, pent in some Athenian tower,
          Devoted to Minerva’s power,
              On the robe’s tissued ground
          While, shadowed by my needle, spread
          Expressive forms, in vivid thread,
          Picture the goddess whirling round
          Her chariot with unrivalled speed;
        Or represent the Titan’s impious crew,
          Whom Jove’s red lightnings overthrew,
              Those monsters doomed to bleed?

    II. 2.

          Alas! my sons, a valiant band,
          My fathers, and my native land,
              Ye shared the general fate.
          Sacked by the Greeks, Troy’s bulwarks smoke,
          But I, constrained to bear the yoke,
          Shall soon behold some foreign state,
          To ignominious bondage led;
        And leaving vanquished Asia Europe’s slave,
          Debarred an honourable grave,
              Ascend the victor’s bed.

TALTHYBIUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    TAL. Where, O ye Phrygian damsels, shall I find
    The wretched Hecuba, who erst was queen
    Of Ilion?

    CHOR.      Prostrate near you on the ground,
    Wrapt in her mantle, there she lies.

    TAL.                                Great Jove!
    What shall I say? that thou from Heaven look’st down
    Upon mankind, or have they rashly formed
    A vain opinion, deeming that the race
    Of gods exist, though fortune governs all?
    Ha! was not this the queen of wealthy Phrygia,
    And was not she the happy Priam’s wife?
    But her whole city by the hostile spear
    Is now destroyed, while she a slave, bowed down
    By age, and childless, stretched upon the ground,
    Defiles with dust her miserable head.
    Old as I am, yet gladly would I die
    Rather than sink into abhorred disgrace.
    Arise, unhappy woman, O lift up
    That feeble body, and that hoary head.

    HEC. Away! O suffer this decrepit frame
    To rest. Why move me! Whosoe’er thou art,
    What mean’st thou? why dost thou molest th’ afflicted?

    TAL. Talthybius: me, the herald of the Greeks,
    O woman, Agamemnon hath despatched
    To fetch you.

    HEC.          Com’st thou, by the Greeks ordained,
    My friend, to slay me also at the tomb?
    How welcome were such tidings; let us go,
    With speed conduct me thither.

    TAL.                          To inter
    Your daughter, I invite you; both the sons
    Of Atreus, and the assembled Grecian host,
    Have sent me for that purpose.

    HEC.                          Ah! what say’st thou?
    Thou com’st not to inform me I must die,
    But to unfold the most disastrous tidings.
    Then art thou lost, my daughter, from the arms
    Of thy fond mother torn; of thee, my child
    Am I bereft. But how did ye destroy her,
    Respectfully, or with the ruthless hand
    Of hostile rage? Speak, though it wound my soul.

    TAL. A second time, in pity to your daughter,
    You make me weep; for now while I relate
    Her sufferings, tears bedew these swimming eyes,
    Such as I shed when at the tomb she perished.
    To view the sacrifice the Grecian host
    Were all assembled: taking by the hand
    Polyxena, on the sepulchral hillock
    Achilles’ son then placed her: I drew near,
    Attended by the chosen youths of Greece,
    To hold the tender victim, and prevent
    Her struggles. But Achilles’ son, uplifting
    With both his hands a cup of massive gold,
    Poured forth libations to his breathless sire;
    And gave a sign to me, through the whole camp
    Strict silence to proclaim. I in the midst
    Stood up and cried: “Be mute, ye Greeks, let none
    Presume to speak, observe a general silence.”
    The troops obeyed, and through their crowded ranks
    Not e’en a breath was heard, while in these words
    The chief expressed his purpose: “Son of Peleus,
    My father, the propitiatory drops
    Of these libations which invite the dead
    Accept; O come and quaff the crimson blood
    Of this pure virgin, whom to thee all Greece
    And I devote; be thou benign, O grant us
    Securely to weigh anchor, to unbind
    Our halsers, and on all of us bestow
    A happy voyage to our native land
    From vanquished Troy.” He ceased, and in his prayer
    Joined the whole army, when the chief unsheathed
    His golden-hilted sword, and gave a sign
    To chosen youths of Greece to hold the virgin,
    Which she perceived, and in these words addressed
    The warriors: “O ye Argives, who laid waste
    My city, willingly I die, let no man
    Confine these arms, I with undaunted breast
    Will meet the stroke. I by the gods conjure you
    Release, and slay me as my rank demands
    Like one born free; for I from mighty kings
    Descend, and in the shades beneath should blush
    To be accounted an ignoble slave.”
    Through all the host ran murmurs of assent,
    And royal Agamemnon bade the youths
    Release the virgin; they their monarch’s voice,
    Soon as they heard, obeyed; our lord’s behests
    The princess too revering, from her shoulder
    Down to her waist rent off the purple robe,
    Displayed her bosom like some statue formed
    In exquisite proportion, and to earth
    Bending her knee, in these affecting words
    Expressed herself: “If at my breast thou aim
    The wound, strike here; if at my neck, that neck
    Is ready bared.” Half willing, and half loth,
    Through pity for the maid, he with keen steel
    Severed the arteries; streams of blood gushed forth:
    Yet even thus, though at her latest gasp,
    She showed a strong solicitude to fall
    With decency, while stood the gazing host
    Around her: soon as through the ghastly wound
    Her soul had issued, every Greek was busied
    In various labours; o’er the corse some strewed
    The verdant foliage, others reared a pyre
    With trunks of fir: but he who nothing brought,
    From him who with funereal ornament
    Was laden, heard these taunts: “O slothful wretch,
    Bear’st thou no robe, no garland, hast thou nought
    To give in honour of this generous maid?”
    Such their encomiums on thy breathless daughter.
    You, of all women, who in such a child
    Were happiest, now most wretched I behold.

    CHOR. Fate, the behests of the immortal gods
    Accomplishing, with tenfold weight hath caused
    This dreadful curse to fall on Priam’s house,
    And on our city.

    HEC.              ’Midst unnumbered ills
    I know not, O my daughter, whither first
    To turn my eyes, for if on one I touch,
    Another hinders me, and I again,
    By a long train of woes succeeding woes,
    To some fresh object am from thence called off;
    Nor can I from my tortured soul efface
    The grief thy fate occasions; yet the tale
    Of thy exalted courage checks my groans,
    Which else had been immoderate. No just cause
    Have we for wonder, if the barren land
    Cheered by Heaven’s influence, with benignant suns
    Yields plenteous harvests, while a richer soil
    Deprived of every necessary aid
    Bears weeds alone. But ’midst the human race
    The wicked man is uniformly wicked,
    The good still virtuous, nor doth evil fortune
    Corrupt his soul; the same unsullied worth
    He still retains. Is this great difference owing
    To birth, or education? We are taught
    What virtue is, by being nurtured well,
    And he who thoroughly hath learnt this lesson,
    Guided by the unerring rule of right,
    Can thence discern what’s base.—My soul in vain
    Hath hazarded these incoherent thoughts.
    But, O Talthybius, to the Greeks repair,
    And strict injunctions give, that no man touch
    My daughter’s corse, but let the gazing crowd
    Be driven away. For in a numerous host
    Its multitudes break loose from all restraints,
    The outrages of mariners exceed
    Devouring flame, and whosoe’er abstains
    From mischief, by his comrades is despised.
    But, O my aged servant, take and dip
    That urn in ocean’s waves, and hither bring,
    Filled with its water, that the last sad rites
    To my departed daughter I may pay,
    And lave the corse of that unwedded bride,
    Of that affianced virgin: but alas!
    Whence with such costly gifts as she deserves,
    Her tomb can I adorn? My present state
    Affords them not, but what it doth afford
    Will I bestow, and from the captive dames
    Appointed to attend me, who reside
    Within these tents, some ornaments collect.
    If, unobserved by their new masters, aught
    They have secreted. O ye splendid domes,
    Ye palaces once happy, which contained
    All that was rich and fair; O Priam thou
    The sire, and I who was the aged mother
    Of an illustrious race, how are we dwindled
    To nothing, stripped of all our ancient pride!
    Yet do we glory, some in mansions stored
    With gold abundant, others when distinguished
    Among the citizens by sounding titles.
    Vain are the schemes which with incessant care
    We frame, and all our boastful words are vain.
    The happiest man is he who, by no ill
    O’ertaken, passes through life’s fleeting day.

                                             [_Exit_ HECUBA.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

            By Heaven was my devoted head
            Menaced with impending ill,
            What time the pines, whose branches spread
          Their tutelary shade o’er Ida’s hill,
            Were laid by Phrygian Paris low,
          That his adventurous bark might stem the tide,
            From Sparta’s coast to waft the fairest bride
        On whom the solar beams their golden radiance throw.

    II.

            Surrounding labours were at hand
            Leagued with the behests of fate;
            Then did such madness seize the land,
          As called down vengeance from a foreign state.
            The royal swain with dazzled eyes
          Gave that decree, the source of all our woes,
          When from three rival goddesses he chose
        Bright Venus, and pronounced that she deserved the prize.

    III.

            The spear and death hence raged around,
          Hence were my mansions levelled with the ground;
            Staining with tears Eurotas’ tide,
          Too deeply grieved to share the victor’s pride,
            The Spartan virgin too in vain
          Bewails her favoured youth untimely slain,
              While, sprinkling ashes o’er their vest
              And hoary head, the matrons bend
            O’er their sons’ urns; their groans to Heaven ascend,
        They tear their cheeks, and beat their miserable breast.

ATTENDANT, CHORUS.

    ATT. Where is the wretched Hecuba, my friends,
    Who in her woes surpasses all, or male,
    Or of the female race? her none can rob
    Of her just claim, pre-eminence in grief.

    CHOR. With the harsh sounds of that ill-boding tongue,
    O wretch, what mean’st thou? wilt thou never cease
    To be th’ unwelcome herald of affliction?

    ATT. Most grievous are the tidings which I bring
    To Hecuba, nor easy were the task
    In words auspicious to make known to mortals
    Such dire calamities.

    CHOR.                From her apartment
    She seasonably comes forth to give thee audience.

HECUBA, ATTENDANT, CHORUS.

    ATT. O most unfortunate, whose woes exceed
    All that the power of language can express,
    My queen, you perish, doomed no more to view
    The blessed light; of children, husband, city,
    Bereft and ruined.

    HEC.              Nothing hast thou told
    But what I knew, thou only com’st t’ insult me:
    Yet wherefore dost thou bring to me this corse
    Of my Polyxena, o’er whom ’twas said
    The Grecian host with pious zeal all vied
    To heap a tomb?

    ATT.            She knows not, but laments
    For the deceased Polyxena alone,
    And to her recent woes is yet a stranger.

    HEC. Ah, bring’st thou the inspired prophetic head,
    And the dishevelled tresses of Cassandra?

    ATT. You speak of one yet living, but bewail not
    This the deceased: survey the naked corse
    Of him whose death to you will seem most strange
    And most unlocked for.

    HEC.                  Ha, I see my son,
    My dearest Polydore, whom he of Thrace
    Beneath his roof protected. I am ruined;
    Now utterly I perish. O my son,
    For thee, for thee I wake the frantic dirge,
    By that malignant demon which assumed
    Thy voice, thy semblance, recently apprized
    Of this calamity.

    ATT.              O wretched mother,
    Know you then what was your son’s fate?

    HEC.                                    A sight
    Incredible and new to me is that
    Which I behold: for from my former woes
    Spring woes in long succession, and the day
    When I shall cease to weep, shall cease to groan,
    Will never come.

    CHOR.            The woes which we endure
    Alas! are dreadful.

    HEC.                O my son, thou son
    Of an ill fated mother, by what death
    Didst thou expire? through what disastrous cause
    Here liest thou prostrate? ah, what bloody hand——

    ATT. I know not; on the shore his corse I found.

    HEC. Cast up by the impetuous waves, or pierced
    With murderous spear?

    ATT.                  The surges of the deep
    Had thrown it on the sand.

    HEC.                      Alas! too well
    I comprehend the meaning of the dream
    Which to these eyes appeared: the spectre borne
    On sable pinions no illusion proved,
    When, O my son, thee, thee it represented
    No longer dwelling in the realms of light.

    CHOR. Instructed by that vision, canst thou name
    The murderer?

    HEC.          ’Twas my friend, the Thracian king,
    With whom in secrecy his aged sire
    Had placed him.

    CHOR.          Ha! what mean’st thou? to possess
    That gold by slaying him?

    HEC.                      O, ’twas a deed
    Unutterable, a deed without a name,
    Surpassing all astonishment, unholy,
    And not to be endured. Where now the laws
    Of hospitality? Accursed man,
    How cruelly hast thou with reeking sword
    Transpierced this unresisting boy, nor heard
    The gentle voice of pity!

    CHOR.                    Hapless queen,
    How hath some demon, thy malignant foe,
    Rendered thee of all mortals the most wretched:
    But I behold great Agamemnon come,
    And therefore, O my friends, let us be silent.

AGAMEMNON, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    AGA. Whence this delay? why go you not t’ inter,
    O Hecuba, your daughter, whom Talthybius
    Directed that no Greek might be allowed
    To touch? We therefore have with your request
    Complied, nor moved the corse. But you remain
    Inactive, which I wonder at, and come
    To fetch you, for each previous solemn rite
    That best might please, if aught such rites can please,
    Have we performed. But ah, what Trojan youth
    Do I behold lie breathless in the tent?
    For that he was no Greek, the garb informs me
    In which he’s clad.

    HEC.                Thou wretch, for of myself
    I speak, when thee, O Hecuba, I name;
    What shall I do, at Agamemnon’s knees
    Fall prostrate, or in silence bear my woes?

    AGA. Why weep, with face averted, yet refuse
    T’ inform me what hath happened? who is he?

    HEC. But from his knees, if, deeming me a slave
    And enemy, the monarch should repel me,
    This would but make my sorrows yet more poignant.

    AGA. I am no seer, nor can I uninformed
    Trace out the secret purpose of your soul.

    HEC. Am I mistaken then, while I suppose
    A foe in him who doth not mean me ill?

    AGA. If ’tis your wish I should not be apprized,
    We both are of one mind; you will not speak,
    And I as little am disposed to hear.

    HEC. Without his aid no vengeance for my child
    Can I obtain: yet why deliberate thus?
    Prosper or fail I must take courage now.
    O royal Agamemnon, by those knees
    A suppliant I conjure you, by that beard,
    And that right hand, victorious o’er your foes.

    AGA. What do you wish for? To obtain your freedom?
    This were not difficult.

    HEC.                    No, give me vengeance
    On yonder guilty wretch, and I am willing
    To linger out the remnant of my life
    In servitude.

    AGA.          Then why implore our aid?

    HEC. For reasons you suspect not. Do you see
    That breathless corse o’er which my tears I shed?

    AGA. The corse I see; but cannot comprehend
    What follows next.

    HEC.              Him erst I bore and nurtured.

    AGA. Is the deceased, O miserable dame,
    One of your children?

    HEC.                  Not of those who fell
    Beneath Troy’s walls.

    AGA.                  What! had you other sons?

    HEC. Yes, him you see, born in an evil hour.

    AGA. But where was he when Ilion was destroyed?

    HEC. His father, apprehensive of his death,
    Conveyed him thence.

    AGA.                From all the other children
    Which then he had, where placed he this apart?

    HEC. In this same region where his corse was found.

    AGA. With Polymestor, sovereign of the land?

    HEC. He, to preserve that execrable gold,
    Was hither sent.

    AGA.            But, by what ruthless hand,
    And how, was he despatched?

    HEC.                        By whom beside?
    The murderer was his friend, the Thracian king.

    AGA. Was he thus eager? O abandoned wretch,
    To seize the gold!

    HEC.              E’en thus; soon as he knew
    Troy was o’erthrown.

    AGA.                But where did you discover
    The body, or who brought it?

    HEC.                        On the shore
    This servant found it.

    AGA.                  Or in quest of him
    Or other task then busied?

    HEC.                      To fetch water
    To lave Polyxena’s remains she went.

    AGA. When he had slain him, it appears, his friend
    Did cast him forth.

    HEC.                He to the waves consigned
    The stripling’s mangled corse.

    AGA.                          O wretched woman,
    Surrounded by immeasurable woes.

    HEC. I am undone; no farther ill remains
    For me t’ experience.

    AGA.                  Ah! what woman e’er
    Was born to such calamities?

    HEC.                        Not one
    Exists, whose sorrows equal mine, unless
    You of Calamity herself would speak.
    Yet hear the motive why I clasp your knees.
    If I appear to merit what I suffer,
    I must be patient; but if not, avenge
    My wrongs upon the man who ’gainst his guest
    Such treachery could commit, who, nor the gods
    Of Erebus beneath, nor those who rule
    In Heaven above regarding, this vile deed,
    Did perpetrate, e’en he with whom I oft
    Partook the feast, on whom I showered each bounty,
    Esteeming him the first of all my friends;
    Yet, when at Ilion’s palace with respect
    He had been treated, a deliberate scheme
    Of murder forming, he destroyed my son,
    On whom he deigned not to bestow a tomb,
    But threw his corse into the briny deep.
    Though I indeed am feeble, and a slave,
    Yet mighty are the gods, and by their law
    The world is ruled: for by that law we learn
    That there are gods, and can mark out the bounds
    Of justice and injustice; if such law
    To you transmitted, be infringed, if they
    Who kill their guests, or dare with impious hand
    To violate the altars of the gods,
    Unpunished ’scape, no equity is left
    Among mankind. Deeming such base connivance
    Unworthy of yourself, revere my woes,
    Have pity on me, like a painter take
    Your stand to view me, and observe the number
    Of my afflictions; once was I a queen,
    But now am I a slave; in many a son
    I once was rich, but now am I both old
    And of my children reft, without a city,
    Forlorn, and of all mortals the most wretched.
    But whither would you go? With you I seem
    To have no interest. Miserable me!
    Why do we mortals by assiduous toil,
    And such a painful search as their importance
    Makes requisite, all other arts attain,
    Yet not enough intent on the due knowledge
    Of that sole empress of the human soul
    Persuasion, no rewards bestow on those
    Who teach us by insinuating words
    How to procure our wishes? who can trust
    Hereafter in prosperity? That band
    Of my heroic sons is now no more,
    Myself a captive, am led forth to tasks
    Unseemly, and e’en now these eyes behold
    The air obscured by Ilion’s rising smoke.
    It might be vain perhaps, were I to found
    A claim to your assistance on your love:
    Yet must I speak: my daughter, who in Troy
    Was called Cassandra, the prophetic dame,
    Partakes your bed; and how those rapturous nights
    Will you acknowledge, or to her how show
    Your gratitude for all the fond embraces
    Which she bestows, O king, or in her stead
    To me her mother? In the soul of man
    Th’ endearments of the night, by darkness veiled,
    Create the strongest interest. To my tale
    Now listen: do you see that breathless corse?
    Each act of kindness which to him is shown,
    Upon a kinsman of the dame you love
    Will be conferred. But, in one point my speech
    Is yet deficient. By the wondrous arts
    Of Dædalus, or some benignant god,
    Could I give voice to each arm, hand, and hair,
    And each extremest joint, they round your knees
    Should cling together, and together weep,
    At once combining with a thousand tongues.
    O monarch, O thou light of Greece, comply,
    And stretch forth that avenging arm to aid
    An aged woman, though she be a thing
    Of nought, O succour: for the good man’s duty
    Is to obey the dread behests of justice,
    And ever punish those who act amiss.

    CHOR. ’Tis wonderful, indeed, how all events
    Happen to mortals, and the dread behests
    Of fate, uncircumscribed by human laws,
    Constrain us to form amities with those
    To whom the most inveterate hate we bore,
    And into foes convert our former friends.

    AGA. To you, O Hecuba, your son, your fortunes,
    And your entreaties, is my pity due.
    I in obedience to the gods and justice
    Wish to avenge you on this impious friend,
    Could I appear your interests to espouse,
    Without the troops suspecting that I slay
    The Thracian monarch for Cassandra’s sake:
    My terrors hence arise; the host esteem
    Him our ally, and the deceased a foe:
    What though you held him dear, his fate, the loss
    Of you alone, affects not the whole camp.
    Reflect too, that you find me well disposed
    To share your toils, and in your cause exert
    My utmost vigour; but, what makes me slow,
    Is a well-grounded fear of blame from Greece.

    HEC. Alas! there’s no man free: for some are slaves
    To gold, to fortune others, and the rest,
    The multitude or written laws restrain
    From acting as their better judgment dictates.
    But since you are alarmed, and to the rabble
    Yield an implicit deference, from that fear
    I will release you; only to my schemes
    Be privy, if some mischief I contrive
    Against the murderer of my son: but take
    No active part. If, when the Thracian suffers,
    As he shall suffer, ’mongst the Greeks a tumult
    Break forth, or they attempt to succour him,
    Restrain them, without seeming to befriend
    My interests. As for what remains, rely
    On me, and I will manage all things well.

    AGA. How then? what mean you? With that aged hand
    To wield a sword, and take away the life
    Of that barbarian, or by drugs endued
    With magic power? the help you need, what arts
    Can furnish? what strong arm have you to fight
    Your battles? whence will you procure allies?

    HEC. These tents conceal a group of Trojan dames.

    AGA. Mean you those captives whom the Greeks have seized.

    HEC. With them I on the murderer will inflict
    Due punishment.

    AGA.            How can the female sex
    O’er men obtain a conquest?

    HEC.                        Numbers strike
    A foe with terror, and the wiles of women
    Are hard to be withstood.

    AGA.                      They may strike terror,
    But in their courage I no trust can place.

    HEC. What? did not women slay Ægyptus’ sons,
    And in their rage exterminate each male
    From Lemnos? But leave me to find out means
    How to effect my purpose. Through the camp
    In safety this my faithful servant send;
    And thou, when to my Thracian friend thou com’st,
    Say, “Hecuba, erst Queen of Troy, invites
    Thee and thy children, on thy own account,
    No less than hers, because she to thy sons
    And thee the self-same message must deliver.”
    The newly slain Polyxena’s interment
    Defer, O Agamemnon; in one flame
    That when their kindred corses are consumed;
    The brother with the sister, who demand
    A twofold portion of their mother’s grief
    Together may be buried in one grave.

    AGA. These rites shall be performed, which could the troops
    Set sail, I needs must have denied: but now,
    Since Neptune sends not an auspicious breeze,
    Expecting a more seasonable voyage,
    Here must we wait. But may success attend you;
    For ’tis the common interest of mankind,
    Of every individual, every state,
    That he who hath transgressed should suffer ill.
    And fortune crown the efforts of the virtuous.

                                          [_Exit_ AGAMEMNON.

CHORUS.

    I. 1.

          No more, O Troy, thy dreaded name
          Conspicuous in the lists of fame,
        ’Midst fortresses impregnable shall stand,
          In such thick clouds an armed host
          Pours terrors from the Grecian coast.
            And wastes thy vanquished land:
          Shorn from thy rampired brow the crown
        Of turrets fell; thy palaces o’erspread
          With smoke lie waste, no more I tread
          Thy wonted streets, my native town.

    I. 2.

          I perished at the midnight hour,
          When, aided by the banquet’s power,
        Sleep o’er my eyes his earliest influence shed;
          Retiring from the choral song,
          The sacrifice and festive throng,
            Stretched on the downy bed
          The bridegroom indolently lay,
        His massive spear suspended on the beam,
          No more he saw the helmets gleam.
          Or nautic troops in dread array.

    II. 1.

          While me the golden mirror’s aid,
          My flowing tresses taught to braid
        In graceful ringlets with a fillet bound,
          Just as I cast my robe aside,
          And sought the couch; extending wide
            Through every street this sound
            Was heard; “O when, ye sons of Greece,
          This nest of robbers levelled with the plain,
            Will ye behold your homes again?
          When shall these tedious labours cease?”

    II. 2.

          Then from my couch up starting, drest
          Like Spartan nymph in zoneless vest,
        At Dian’s shrine an ineffectual prayer
          Did I address; for hither led,
          First having viewed my husband dead,
              Full oft I in despair,
          As the proud vessel sailed from land,
        Looked back, and saw my native walls laid low,
          Then fainting with excess of woe
          At length lost sight of Ilion’s strand.

    III.

        Helen that sister to the sons of Jove,
            And Paris Ida’s swain,
          With my curses still pursuing,
          For to them I owe my ruin,
          Me they from my country drove,
          Never to return again,
          By that detested spousal rite
          On which Hymen never smiled,
        No, ’twas some demon who with lewd delight
          Their frantic souls beguiled:
          Her may ocean’s waves no more
          Waft to her paternal shore.

POLYMESTOR, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    POLYM. For thee, O Priam, my unhappy friend,
    And you, my dearest Hecuba, I weep,
    Beholding your distress, your city taken,
    Your daughter newly slain: alas! there’s nought
    To be relied on; fame is insecure,
    Nor can the prosperous their enjoyments guard
    Against a change of Fortune, for the gods
    Backward and forward turn her wavering wheel,
    And introduce confusion in the world,
    That we, because we know not will happen,
    May worship them. But of what use are plaints
    Which have no virtue to remove our woes?
    If you my absence censure, be appeased,
    For in the midst of Thracia’s wide domains
    I from these coasts was distant at the time
    Of your arrival: soon as I returned,
    When from the palace I was issuing forth,
    This your attendant met me, and delivered
    The message, hearing which, I hither came.

    HEC. O Polymestor, wretched as I am,
    I blush to see thy face; because thou erst
    In happier days didst know me, I with shame
    Appear before thee in my present fortunes.
    Nor can I look at thee with steadfast eyes:
    But this thou wilt not deem to be a mark
    Of enmity: the cause of such behaviour
    Is only custom, which forbids our sex
    To gaze on men.

    POLYM.          No wonder you thus act
    Under such circumstances. But what need
    Have you of me, and wherefore did you send
    To fetch me from the palace?

    HEC.                        I in private
    A secret of importance would disclose
    To thee and to thy children. From these tents
    Give orders for thy followers to depart.

    POLYM. [_to his attendants, who retire_.]
    Withdraw; this solitary spot is safe.
    For you and the confederate Grecian host
    Are all attached to me. But ’tis incumbent
    On you t’ inform me what my prosperous fortunes
    Can yield to succour my unhappy friends!
    For this is what I wish to do.

    HEC.                          Say first,
    If he, my son, whom this maternal hand
    And his fond father in thy mansions placed,
    My Polydore, yet live. I’ll then pursue
    My questions.

    POLYM.        Yes, in him you still are blest.

    HEC. How kind, how worthy of thyself that speech,
    My dearest friend!

    POLYM.            What farther would you know?

    HEC. If haply yet the youth remember aught
    Of me his mother.

    POLYM.            Much he wished to come
    And visit you in private.

    HEC.                      Is the gold
    He brought from Troy preserved?

    POLYM.                I keep it safe
    In my own palace.

    HEC.              Keep it if thou wilt:
    But covet not the treasures of thy friends.

    POLYM. I do not covet them; my utmost wish
    Is to enjoy, O woman, what I have.

    HEC. Know’st thou then, what to thee and to thy sons
    I want to say?

    POLYM.        I know not; till in words
    Your thoughts are signified.

    HEC.                        Bestow such love
    On Polydore as thou receiv’st from me.

    POLYM. What is it that to me and to my children
    You would disclose?

    HEC.                The spot, where deep in earth,
    The ancient treasures of all Priam’s house
    Lie buried.

    POLYM.      Is this secret what you wish
    Should to your son be mentioned?

    HEC.                            Yes, by thee,
    Because thou art a virtuous man!

    POLYM.                          But wherefore
    Did you require these children should be present?

    HEC. For them to know the secret, if thou die,
    Will be of great advantage.

    POLYM.                      You have spoken
    Well and discreetly.

    HEC.                Know’st thou where at Troy
    Minerva’s temple stands?

    POLYM.                  Is the gold there?
    But by what mark shall I the spot distinguish?

    HEC. Above the surface rises a black stone.

    POLYM. Will you describe the place yet more minutely?

    HEC. The gold I in thy custody would place,
    Which I from Ilion hither bring.

    POLYM.                          Where is it?
    Concealed beneath your garment?

    HEC.                            ’Midst a heap
    Of spoils laid up within yon tents.

    POLYM.                              Where mean you?
    These are the Grecian mariners’ abode.

    HEC. In separate dwellings have they placed the captives?

    POLYM. But how can we rely upon the faith
    Of those within? doth no man thither come?

    HEC. There’s not a Greek within; we are alone:
    But enter thou these doors: for now the host,
    Impatient to weigh anchor, would return
    From Ilion to their homes. Thou with thy children
    T’ accomplish all the dread behests of fate,
    Shalt thither go where thou hast lodged my son.

                          [_Exeunt_ HECUBA _and_ POLYMESTOR.

    CHOR. Thou hast not yet received the blow,
    But justice sure will lay thee low.
    Like him who headlong from on high
    Falls where no friendly haven’s nigh,
    Into the ocean’s stormy wave,
    Here shalt thou find a certain grave:
    For twofold ruin doth impend
    O’er him who human laws pursue,
    And righteous gods indignant view:
    Thee shall the hope of gain mislead,
    Which prompts thee to advance with speed,
    And Pluto’s loathed abode descend:
    Soon shalt thou press th’ ensanguined strand,
    Slain by a woman’s feeble hand.

    POLYM. [_within._] Ah me, the light that visited these eyes
    is darkened.

    SEMICHOR. Heard ye, O my friends, the shriek
    Of yonder Thracian?

    POLYM. [_within._] Yet again, alas,
    My children’s foul and execrable murder!

    SEMICHOR. My friends, some recent mischief hath within
    Been perpetrated.

    POLYM. [_within._] Though your feet are swift,
    Ye shall not ’scape, for through the walls I’ll burst
    My passage.

    SEMICHOR. With a forceful hand, behold
    He brandishes the javelin. Shall we rush
    To seize him? This important crisis bids us
    Assist our queen and Phrygia’s valiant dames.

    HEC. Now do thy worst, and from their hinges rend
    Yon massive gates; no more canst thou impart
    To those lost eyes their visual orbs, nor see
    Thy sons, whom I have slain, to life restored.

HECUBA, CHORUS.

    CHOR. Hast thou, my honoured mistress, caught the Thracian,
    Over this treacherous friend hast thou prevailed,
    And all thy threats accomplished?

    HEC.                              Ye shall see him
    Before the tent, without delay, deprived
    Of sight, advancing with unsteady foot,
    And the two breathless corses of his sons,
    Whom I, assisted by the noblest matrons
    Of Troy, have slain. Th’ atonement he hath paid
    To my revenge, is just. But now behold
    He issues forth: I will retire and shun
    The Thracian chief’s unconquerable rage.

POLYMESTOR, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    POLYM. Ah, whither am I going? wretched me!
    Where am I? what supports me? With these hands
    Groping my way like some four-footed beast,
    How shall I turn me, to the right or left,
    That I those murderous Phrygian dames may seize
    Who have destroyed me? Impious and accurst
    Daughters of Ilion, in what dark recess
    Do they escape me? Would to heaven, O Sun,
    Thou to these bleeding eyeballs could’st afford
    A cure, that thou my blindness could’st remove.
    But hush, I hear those women’s cautious tread.
    How shall I leap upon them? with their flesh
    How shall I glut my rage, and for a feast
    To hungry tigers cast their mangled bones,
    In just requital of the horrid wrongs,
    Which I from them, ah wretched me, have suffered?
    But whither, by what impulse am I borne,
    Leaving the corses of my sons exposed
    To hellish Bacchanalians, as they lie
    Torn by the dogs, and on the mountain’s ridge
    Cast forth unburied! Where shall I stand still?
    Or whither shall I go? Like some proud bark
    Towed into harbour, which contracts its sails;
    I to that fatal chamber which contains
    The corses of my murdered sons rush onward
    With speed involuntary.

    CHOR.                  Hapless man,
    How art thou visited by woes too grievous
    To be endured! but by dread Jove thy foe,
    On him whose deeds are base, it is ordained
    That the severest punishments await.

    POLYM. Rouse, O ye Thracians, armed with ponderous spears,
    Arrayed in mail, for generous steeds renowned,
    A hardy race, whom Mars himself inspires.
    To you, O Grecian troops, and both the sons
    Of Atreus, I with clamorous voice appeal:
    Come hither, I implore you by the gods.
    Do any of you hear me? Is there none
    Who will assist? Why loiter ye? Those women,
    Those captives have destroyed me. Horrid wrongs
    Have I endured; ah me, the foul reproach!
    But whither shall I turn, or whither go?
    Through the aërial regions shall I wing
    My swift career to that sublime abode
    Where Sirius or Orion from his eyes
    Darts radiant flames? or, to perdition doomed,
    Shall I descend to Pluto’s sable flood?

    CHOR. He merits pardon, whosoe’er assailed
    By ills too grievous to be borne, shakes off
    The loathed encumbrance of a wretched life.

AGAMEMNON, POLYMESTOR, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    AGA. Hearing thy shrieks I came. For Echo, child
    Of craggy mountains, in no gentle note
    Wafted those sounds tumultuous through the host.
    Had we not known that by the Grecian spear
    The towers of vanquished Phrygia are o’erthrown,
    Such uproar would have caused no small alarm.

    POLYM. My dearest friend, soon as I heard your voice,
    I instantly perceived ’twas Agamemnon.
    See you my sufferings?

    AGA.                  Wretched Polymestor!
    Who hath destroyed thee? who bereaved of sight
    Thy bleeding orbs, and those thy children slew?
    Whoe’er the author of such deeds, his rage
    Was dreadful sure ’gainst thee and ’gainst thy sons.

    POLYM. With the assistance of those captive dames,
    Me Hecuba hath murdered, more than murdered.

    AGA. What mean’st thou? Are you guilty of the crime
    With which he charges you? and have you dared
    To perpetrate an action thus audacious?

    POLYM. Ah me! what said you? Is she near at hand?
    Inform me where to find, that I may seize her,
    And scatter wide to all the fowls of heaven
    Her mangled corse.

    AGA.              Ha! what is thy design?

    POLYM. Allow me, I conjure you by the gods,
    To grasp her with this frantic arm.

    AGA.                                Desist,
    And casting forth all rancour from thy heart,
    Now plead thy cause; that, hearing both apart,
    I with unbiassed justice may decide,
    If thou these sufferings merit’st.

    POLYM.                            I will speak.
    There was one Polydore, the youngest son
    Of those whom Hecuba to Priam bore;
    Him erst removing from the Phrygian realm,
    His sire to me consigned, that in my palace
    He might be nurtured, when that hoary king
    The fall of Troy suspected: him I slew:
    But hear my motives for the deed, to prove
    How justly and how prudently I acted.
    Your enemy, that boy, if he survived
    The ruin of his country, might, I feared,
    Collect the scattered citizens of Troy,
    And there again reside. I also feared,
    That when the Greeks knew one of Priam’s line
    Was living, with a second fleet invading
    The shores of Phrygia, they again might drain
    Of their inhabitants our Thracian fields,
    Involving us, their neighbours, in the vengeance
    They on their foes at Ilion wreak. To us
    Already hath such neighbourhood, O king,
    Proved baneful. But, apprized of her son’s fate,
    Hecuba drew me hither, on pretence
    She would inform me where in massive gold
    The hidden treasures of old Priam’s race
    Beneath Troy’s ruins were secured. Alone,
    She with my children brought me to this tent,
    That none beside might know. With bended knee,
    While on a couch I sat, some on my left,
    And others on my right, as with a friend,
    Full many of the Trojan damsels took
    Their places, holding up against the sun
    My robe, the woof of an Edonian loom:
    Some feigned t’ admire it, others viewed my spear,
    And stripped me of them both. From hand to hand
    The matrons, seeming to caress my children,
    Removed them far from their unhappy sire:
    And after their fond speeches, in an instant,
    (Could you believe it?) snatching up the swords,
    Which they beneath their garments had concealed,
    They stabbed my sons, whom while I strove to aid,
    In hostile guise their comrades held my arms
    And feet: if I looked up, they by the hair
    Confined me; if I moved my hands, my struggles
    Proved ineffectual, through the numerous band
    Of women who assailed me, and to close
    The scene of my calamity, accomplished
    A deed with more than common horror fraught,
    For they tore out my bleeding eyes, and fled.
    But, like a tiger starting up, I chased
    These ruthless fiends, and with a hunter’s speed
    Each wall examined, dashing to the ground,
    And breaking what I seized. These cruel wrongs,
    While I your interests study to maintain,
    O Agamemnon, and despatch your foe,
    Have I endured. To spare a long harangue,
    The whole of what ’gainst woman hath been said
    By those of ancient times, is saying now,
    Or shall be said hereafter, in few words
    Will I comprise; nor ocean’s waves, nor earth,
    Nurture so vile a race, as he who most
    Hath with the sex conversed, but knows too well.

    CHOR. Curb that audacious virulence of speech,
    Nor, by thy woes embittered, thus revile
    All womankind; the number of our sex
    Is great, and some there are, whom as a mark
    To envy, their distinguished worth holds forth,
    Though some are justly numbered with the wicked.

    HEC. O Agamemnon, never ought the tongue
    To have a greater influence o’er mankind
    Than actions; but whoever hath done well,
    Ought to speak well; and he, whose deeds are base,
    To use unseemly language, nor find means
    By specious words to colour o’er injustice.
    Full wise indeed are they to whom such art
    Is most familiar: but to stand the test
    Of time not wise enough; for they all perish,
    Not one of them e’er ’scapes. These previous thoughts
    To you, O mighty king, have I addressed.
    But now to him I turn, and will refute
    The fallacies he uttered. What pretence
    Hast thou for saying, that to free the Greeks
    From such a second war, and for the sake
    Of Agamemnon, thou didst slay my son?
    For first, O villain, the barbarian race
    With Greece, nor will, nor ever can be friends.
    What interest roused thy zeal? Didst thou expect
    To form a nuptial union? Wert thou moved
    By kindred ties, or any secret cause?
    Greece with a fleet forsooth would have returned
    To lay thy country waste. Who, canst thou think,
    Will credit such assertions? If the truth
    Thou wilt confess, gold and thy thirst of gain
    Were my son’s murderers. Why, when Troy yet flourished,
    Why, when the city was on every side
    Fenced by strong bulwarks, why, when Priam lived,
    And Hector wielded a victorious spear,
    Didst thou not, if thou hadst designed to act
    In Agamemnon’s favour, at the time
    When thou didst nurture my unhappy son,
    And in thy palace shelter, either slay,
    Or to the Greeks surrender up the youth
    A living prisoner? But when Ilion’s light
    Was utterly extinguished, when the smoke
    Declared the city subject to our foes,
    The stranger thou didst murder, at thy hearth
    Who sought protection. To confirm thy guilt,
    Now hear this farther charge: if thou to Greece
    Hadst been a friend indeed, thou should’st have given
    The gold thou say’st thou keep’st, not for thine own,
    But Agamemnon’s sake, among the troops
    Who suffer want, and from their native land
    Have for a tedious season been detained.
    But thou from those rapacious hands e’en now
    Canst not endure to part with it, but hoard’st it
    Still buried in thy coffers: as became thee,
    Hadst thou trained up my son, hadst thou to him
    Been a protector, great is the renown
    Thou would’st have gained; for in distress the good
    Are steadfast; but our prosperous fortunes swarm
    With friends unbidden. Hadst thou been in want,
    And Polydore abounded, a sure treasure
    To thee would he have proved: but now no longer
    In him hast thou a friend; thou of thy gold
    Hast lost th’ enjoyment, thou thy sons hast lost,
    And art thyself thus wretched. But to you,
    O Agamemnon, now again I speak:
    If you assist him, you will seem corrupt;
    For you will benefit a man devoid
    Of honour, justice, piety, or truth;
    It might be said that you delight in evil;
    But, I presume not to reproach my lords.

    CHOR. How doth a virtuous cause inspire the tongue
    With virtuous language!

    AGA.                    On a stranger’s woes
    Reluctant I pronounce, but am constrained;
    For shame attends the man who takes in hand
    Some great affair, and leaves it undecided.
    Know then, to me thou seem’st not to have slain
    Thy guest through an attachment to my cause,
    Nor yet to that of Greece, but that his gold
    Thou might’st retain: though in this wretched state
    Thou speak to serve thy interests. Among you
    Perhaps the murder of your guests seems light;
    We Greeks esteem it base. If I acquit thee
    How shall I ’scape reproach? Indeed I cannot:
    Since thou hast dared to perpetrate the crime,
    Endure the consequence.

    POLYM.                  Too plain it seems,
    Ah me! that, vanquished by a female slave,
    Here shall I perish by ignoble hands.

    HEC. Is not this just for the atrocious deed
    Which thou hast wrought?

    POLYM.                  My children, wretched me!
    And these quenched orbs.

    HEC.                    Griev’st thou, yet think’st thou not
    That I lament my son?

    POLYM.                Malignant woman,
    Do you rejoice in taunting my distress?

    HEC. In such revenge have not I cause for joy?

    POLYM. Yet not so hastily, when ocean’s wave——

    HEC. Shall in a bark convey me to the shores
    Of Greece?

    POLYM.    Shall whelm you in its vast abyss
    Fall’n from the shrouds.

    HEC.                    Raised thither by what impulse?

    POLYM. Up the tall mast you with swift foot shall climb.

    HEC. On feathered pinions borne, or how?

    POLYM.                                    With form
    Canine endued, and eyeballs glaring fire.

    HEC. Whence didst thou learn that I such wondrous change
    Shall undergo?

    POLYM.        Bacchus, the Thracian seer,
    Gave this response.

    HEC.                To thee did he unfold
    Nought of the grievous sufferings thou endur’st?

    POLYM. Then could you ne’er have caught me by your wiles.

    HEC. But on this change of being, after death,
    Or while I yet am living, shall I enter?

    POLYM. After your death, and men shall call your tomb——

    HEC. By my new form, or what is it thou mean’st?

    POLYM. The sepulchre of that vile brute, an object
    Conspicuous to the mariner.

    HEC.                        I care not;
    My vengeance is complete.

    POLYM.                    Cassandra too,
    Your daughter, must inevitably bleed.

    HEC. Abomination! On thy guilty head
    These curses I retort.

    POLYM.          Her shall the wife
    Of Agamemnon slay, who sternly guards
    His royal mansion.

    HEC.              Such a frantic deed
    As this may Tyndarus’ daughter ne’er commit!

    POLYM. She next uplifting the remorseless axe
    Shall smite her lord.

    AGA.                  Ha! madman, dost thou court
    Thy ruin?

    POLYM.    Slay me; for the murderous bath
    Awaits you, when to Argos you return.

    AGA. Will ye not drag him from my sight by force?

    POLYM. Hear you with grief what I announce?

    AGA.                                        My followers,
    Why stop ye not the miscreant’s boding mouth?

    POLYM. This mouth be closed for ever: I have spoken.

    AGA. Will ye not cast him with the utmost speed
    Upon some desert island, since he dares
    To speak with such licentiousness? Depart,
    O wretched Hecuba, and both those corses
    Deposit in the grave. But, as for you,
    Ye to your lord’s pavilions must repair,
    O Phrygian dames: for I perceive the gales
    Rising to waft us homeward; may success
    Attend the voyage to our native land!
    And in our mansions may we find all well,
    Freed from these dangers!

    CHOR.                    To the haven go,
    And to the tents, my friends, t’ endure the toils
    Our lords impose: for thus harsh fate enjoins.




HERCULES DISTRACTED.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    AMPHITRYON.
    MEGARA.
    CHORUS OF THEBAN OLD MEN.
    HERCULES.
    LYCUS.
    IRIS.
    A FIEND.
    MESSENGER.
    THESEUS.


SCENE.—BEFORE THE ALTAR OF JUPITER, AT THE ENTRANCE OF THE HOUSE OF
HERCULES IN THEBES.

AMPHITRYON, MEGARA.

    AMP. Is there on earth, a stranger to the man
    Who shared the same auspicious nuptial bed
    With Jove, Amphitryon born at Argos, sprung
    From Perseus’ son Alcæus, me the sire
    Of Hercules? He in these regions dwelt,
    Where from the soil a helmed crop arose;
    Mars, a small number of that race, preserved,
    Whose children’s children people Cadmus’ city.
    Hence Creon king of Thebes, Menæceus’ son,
    Derives his birth, and Creon is the sire
    Of this unhappy Megara, to grace
    Whose hymeneal pomp, each Theban erst
    Attuned the jocund lute, into my house
    When Hercules conducted her. But leaving
    This realm where I resided, and his consort
    And kindred, my son chose to fix his seat
    Within the walls of Argos, of that city
    Erected by the Cyclops, whence I fled
    Stained with Electryon’s gore: but to alleviate
    My woes, and in his native land obtain
    A quiet residence, this great reward
    He on Eurystheus promised to bestow,
    That he would rid the world of every pest:
    Harassed by Juno’s stings, or envious fate,
    With her conspiring: but, his other labours
    Accomplished, he through Tænarus’ jaws at length
    Went to the house of Pluto, to drag forth
    Into the realms of day hell’s triple hound:
    He thence returns not. But an old tradition
    Among the race of Cadmus hath prevailed,
    That Lycus, Dirce’s husband, erst bore rule
    Over this city, till Jove’s sons, Amphion
    And Zethus, who on milk-white coursers rode,
    Became its sovereigns. Lycus’ son who bears
    His father’s name, no Theban, but arriving
    From the Eubœan state, slew royal Creon,
    And having slain him, seized the throne, invading
    The city with tumultuous broils convulsed.
    But the affinity which we have formed
    With Creon, seems to be my greatest curse:
    For while my son stays in the realms beneath,
    Lycus th’ egregious monarch of this land
    Would with the children of Alcides kill
    His consort, by fresh murders to extinguish
    The past, and kill me too (if one through age
    So useless may be numbered among men),
    Lest when the boys attain maturer age,
    They should avenge their grandsire Creon’s death.
    But I (for my son left me here to tend
    His children, and direct the house, since he
    Entered the subterraneous realms of night),
    With their afflicted mother, lest the race
    Of Hercules should bleed, for an asylum
    Have chosen this altar of protecting Jove,
    Which my illustrious son for a memorial
    Of his victorious arms did here erect,
    When he in battle had subdued the Minyans.
    But we, though destitute of every comfort,
    Of food, drink, clothing, though constrained to lie
    On the bare pavement, here maintain our seat,
    For every hospitable door is barred
    Against us, and we have no other hope
    Of being saved. Some of our friends I see
    Are faithless, and the few who prove sincere,
    Too weak to aid us. Such is the effect
    Of adverse fortune o’er the race of men;
    May he to whom I bear the least attachment,
    Never experience that unerring test
    Of friendship.

    MEG.          Thou old man, who erst didst storm
    The Taphian ramparts, when thou with renown
    Didst lead the host of Thebes; the secret will
    Of Heaven, how little can frail mortals know!
    For to me too of no avail have proved
    The fortunes of my father, who elate
    With wealth and regal power (whence at the breasts
    Of its possessors spears are hurled by those
    Whose souls the lust of mad ambition fires),
    And having children, gave me to thy son,
    Joining a noble consort in the bonds
    Of wedlock with Alcides, through whose death
    These blessings are all fled. Now I, and thou,
    Old man, are doomed to perish with the sons
    Of Hercules, whom, as the bird extends
    Her sheltering wings over her callow brood,
    I guard. By turns they come and question me:
    “O mother, whither is my father gone?
    What is he doing? when will he return?”
    Though now too young sufficiently to feel
    How great their loss, thus ask they for their sire.
    I change the theme, and forge a soothing tale,
    But am with wonder smitten when the doors
    Creak on their massive hinges, and at once
    They all start up, that at their father’s knees
    They may fall prostrate. But what hope hast thou
    Of saving us, or what support, old man?
    For I to thee look up. We from the bounds
    Of these domains unnoticed cannot ’scape;
    Mightier than us, a watchful guard is placed
    At every avenue, and in our friends
    No longer for protection can we trust.
    Explain thyself, if thou hast any scheme,
    By which thou from impending death canst save us;
    But let us strive to lengthen out the time,
    Since we are feeble.

    AMP.                  ’Tis no easy task
    In such a situation, O my daughter,
    To form a sure and instantaneous judgment.

    MEG. What is there wanting to complete thy woes,
    Or why art thou so fond of life?

    AMP.                            That blessing
    I still enjoy, still cherish pleasing hopes.

    MEG. I also hope, old man: but it is folly
    To look for what we never can attain.

    AMP. We by delaying might avert our fate.

    MEG. But I in this sad interval of time
    Feel piercing anguish.

    AMP.                  The auspicious gales
    Of fortune, O my daughter, yet may waft
    Both you and me out of our present troubles,
    If e’er my son your valiant lord return.
    But O be pacified yourself, and cause
    Your children to dry up their streaming tears;
    With gentle language and delusive tales
    Beguile them, though all fraudful arts are wretched.
    For the disasters which afflict mankind
    Are wearied out; the stormy winds retain not
    Their undiminished force; nor are the blest
    Perpetually blest: for all things change,
    And widely differ from their former state.
    The valiant man is he who still holds fast
    His hopes; but to despair bespeaks the coward.

CHORUS, AMPHITRYON, MEGARA.

    CHOR. Propped on my faithful staff, from home,
    And from the couch of palsied age,
    In melancholy guise I roam,
    Constrained to chaunt funereal strains,
    As the expiring swan complains,
    A war of words alone I wage,
    In semblance, but a flitting sprite,
    An airy vision of the night.
    I totter; yet doth active zeal
    This faithful bosom still inspire.
    Ye children who have lost your sire,
    Thou veteran, and thou aged dame,
    Doomed for thy lord these griefs to feel,
    Whose Pluto’s dreary mansions claim;
    O weary not your tender feet.
    Like steeds by galling harness bound,
    To turn the ponderous mill around,
    I would advance my friends to meet,
    Yet are my utmost efforts vain,
    This shattered frame I scarce sustain:
    Draw near, O take this trembling hand,
    And holding fast my robe, support
    My steps, thy needful aid I court,
    Because I am too weak to stand.
    Lead on the chief, though now by years
    Bowed down, who marshalled on the strand,
    His comrades erst a hardy band;
    With him in youth we launched our spears,
    Nor then belied our native land.
    See how their eyes dart liquid fire,
    Those children emulate their sire;
    But still hereditary fate,
    Pursues with unrelenting hate
    Their tender years, nor can their charms
    Redeem them from impending harms.
    What valiant champions of thy cause,
    O Greece, thy violated laws,
    When these thy great supports shall fail,
    Torn from thy fostering land wilt thou bewail.
    But I behold the monarch of the realm,
    Tyrannic Lycus, who these doors approaches.

LYCUS, AMPHITRYON, MEGARA, CHORUS.

    LYC. This question (if I may) I to the sire
    And consort of Alcides would propose
    (But, as your king, I have a right to make
    Any inquiries I think fit): How long
    Seek ye to spin out life? What farther hope
    Have ye in view, what succour to ward off
    The stroke of death? Expect ye that the father
    Of these deserted children, who lies stretched
    Amid the realms beneath will thence return,
    That ye bely your rank, and meanly utter
    These clamorous plaints on being doomed to die?
    Through Greece hast _thou_ diffused an idle boast,
    That Jove enjoyed thy consort, and begot
    An offspring like himself; while _you_ exulted
    In being called wife to the first of heroes.
    But what great action hath your lord performed,
    In having slain that hydra at the lake,
    Or the Nemæan lion whom with snares
    He caught, and then did arrogantly boast
    That he had strangled in his nervous arms?
    Will these exploits enable you to vie
    With me? and for such merit am I bound
    To spare the sons of Hercules, who gained
    A name which he deserved not? He was brave
    In waging war with beasts, in nought beside,
    With his left hand he never did sustain
    The shield, nor faced he the protended spear,
    But with his bow, that weapon of a dastard,
    Was still prepared for flight: such arms afford
    No proof of courage; but the truly brave
    Is he who in the ranks where he is stationed
    Maintains his ground, and sees with steadfast eye
    Those ghastly wounds the missile javelin gives.
    Old man, I act not thus through cruelty,
    But caution; for I know that I have slain
    Creon _her_ father, and possess his throne.
    These children therefore will not I allow
    To live till they attain maturer years,
    Lest they should punish me for such a deed.

    AMP. Jove will assert the cause of his own son.
    But as for me, O Hercules, my care
    Shall be to prove the folly of this tyrant:
    For thy illustrious name I will not suffer
    To be reproached. First from a hateful charge
    (And that of cowardice I deem most hateful),
    Calling the gods to witness, am I bound
    To vindicate thy honour. I appeal
    To Jove’s own thunder, and th’ impetuous steeds,
    Which drew Alcides’ chariot when he sped
    Those winged arrows to transpierce the flanks
    Of earth-born giants, and among the gods
    Triumphant revelled at the genial board.
    Go next to Pholoe’s realm, thou worst of kings,
    And ask the Centaurs’ monstrous brood, what man
    They judge to be most brave, whether that title
    Belongs not to my son, who only bears,
    As you assert, the semblance of a hero?
    But should you question the Eubœan mount
    Of Dirphys, where your infancy was nurtured,
    It cannot sound your praise: you have performed
    No glorious action for your native land
    To testify, yet scorn that wise invention
    The quiver fraught with shafts: attend to me
    And I will teach you wisdom. By his arms
    Encumbered, stands the warrior who is sheathed
    In ponderous mail, and through the fears of those
    Who fight in the same rank, if they want courage,
    Loses his life; nor, if his spear be broken,
    Furnished with nought but courage, from his breast
    Can he repel the wound; but he who bends
    With skilful hand the bow, hath this advantage,
    Which never fails him: with a thousand shafts
    He smites the foe, no danger to himself
    Incurring, but securely stands aloof,
    And wreaks his vengeance while they gaze around,
    Without perceiving whence the weapon comes:
    His person he exposes not, but takes
    A guarded post: for what in war displays
    The greatest prudence, is to vex the foe,
    Nor rush at random on their pointed spears.
    Such reasoning on the subject in debate
    With yours indeed agrees not: but what cause
    Have you for wishing to destroy these children?
    How have they injured you? In one respect
    I deem you wise, because you dread the race
    Of valiant men, and feel yourself a coward:
    Yet is it hard on us, if we must bleed
    Your apprehensions to remove; you ought
    To suffer all we would inflict, from us
    Whose merit is superior far to yours,
    Were Jove impartial. Would you therefore wield
    The sceptre of this land, let us depart
    As exiles from the realm, or you shall meet
    With strict retaliation, when the gales
    Of wavering fortune alter. O thou land
    Of Cadmus (for to thee I now will speak,
    But in reproachful accents), such protection
    Afford’st thou to the sons of Hercules,
    Who singly warring with the numerous host
    Of Minyæ, caused the Thebans to lift up
    Their free-born eyes undaunted? I on Greece
    No praises can bestow, nor will pass over
    In silence its base treatment of my son,
    For ’twas its duty in these children’s cause,
    Bearing flames, pointed spears, and glittering mail,
    To have marched forth, and recompensed the toils
    Of their great father, who hath purged the sea
    And land from all its monsters. Such protection
    Nor doth the Theban city, O my children,
    Nor Greece afford you; but ye now look up
    To me a feeble friend who can do nought,
    But plead for you with unavailing words.
    For all the vigour which I once possessed
    Hath now deserted me; old age assails
    My trembling limbs and this decrepit frame.
    Were I again endued with youthful strength,
    I would snatch up my javelin, and defile
    With gore the yellow ringlets on the head
    Of that oppressor, whom his fear should drive
    Beyond the most remote Atlantic bounds.

    CHOR. Are there not causes such as may provoke
    Those who are virtuous to express their thoughts,
    Though destitute of eloquence?

    LYC.                          ’Gainst me
    Speak what thou wilt, for thou art armed with words,
    But for injurious language by my deeds
    Will I requite thee. Go, send woodmen, some
    To Helicon, some to Parnassus’ vale,
    Bid them fell knotted oaks, and having borne them
    Into the city, heap their ponderous trunks
    Around the altar, and with kindled flames
    Consume the bodies of this hated race;
    So shall they learn that Creon the deceased
    No longer is the ruler of this land,
    But that I wield the sceptre. As for you
    Who thwart my counsels, O ye aged men,
    Not for the sons of Hercules alone
    Shall ye lament, but for those evil fortunes
    Which ye and your own house are doomed to suffer:
    But this shall ye remember, that to me,
    Your monarch, ye are slaves.

    CHOR.                        O ye the race
    Of earth, whom Mars erst sowed, when he had torn
    From the huge dragon’s jaws th’ envenomed teeth,
    With those right hands why will ye not uplift
    The staves on which ye lean, and with his gore
    Defile the head of this unrighteous man,
    Not born at Thebes, but in a foreign realm,
    From inconsiderate youths who gains that homage
    Which he deserves not? but in evil hour
    O’er me shalt thou bear rule, nor shall my wealth
    Acquired by many toils be ever thine:
    Go, act the tyrant in Eubœa’s land,
    From whence thou hither cam’st: for while I live,
    The sons of Hercules thou ne’er shalt slay,
    Nor is their mighty father plunged so deep
    Beneath earth’s surface, that he cannot hear
    His children’s outcries. Thou to whom this land
    Owes its destruction dost possess the throne:
    But he its benefactor is deprived
    Of the rewards he merits. Me thou deem’st
    Officious, for protecting those I love
    E’en in the grave, where friends are needed most.
    O my right arm, how dost thou wish to wield
    The spear, but through enfeebling age hast lost
    Thy vigour: else would I have quelled thy pride
    Who dar’st to call me slave, and in this Thebes,
    Where thou exult’st, with glory dwelt. A city
    Diseased through mutiny and evil counsels
    Is void of wisdom, or would ne’er have chosen
    Thee for its lord.

    MEG.              Ye veterans, I applaud
    Your zeal; for indignation at the wrongs
    His friends endure becomes the virtuous friend.
    But let not anger ’gainst your lord expose you
    To suffer in our cause. My judgment hear,
    Amphitryon, if to thee in aught I seem
    To speak discreetly. I these children love
    (And how can I help loving those I bore?)
    For whom I have endured the painful throes
    Of childbirth. And to die is what I think of
    As of a thing most dreadful; but the man
    Who with necessity contends I hold
    An idiot. But let us, since die we must,
    Not perish in the flames to furnish scope
    Of laughter to our foes, which I esteem
    An ill beyond e’en death: for much is due
    To the unsullied honour of our house,
    For thee who erst in arms hast gained renown,
    To die with cowardice, were a reproach
    Not to be borne. My lord, though I forbear
    To dwell on his just praises, is so noble,
    He would not wish these children saved, to bear
    The imputation of an evil name:
    For through the conduct of degenerate sons
    Reproach oft falls on their illustrious sires;
    And the examples which my husband gave me,
    I ought not to reject. But view what grounds
    Thou hast for hope, that I of these may form
    A proper estimate. Dost thou expect
    Thy son to issue from the realms beneath?
    What chief deceased from Pluto’s loathed abode
    Did e’er return? Can we by gentle words
    Appease this tyrant? No: we ought to fly
    From fools who are our foes: but to the wise
    And generous yield; for we with greater ease
    May make a friend of him in whom we find
    A sense of virtuous shame. But to my soul
    This thought occurs, that we, the children’s sentence,
    By our entreaties, haply might obtain
    Converted into exile: yet this too
    Is wretched, at th’ expense of piteous need
    To compass our deliverance. For their friends
    Avoid the face of guests like these, and look
    No longer kindly on the banished man
    After one day is over. Rouse thy courage,
    And bleed with us, thee too, since death awaits.
    By thy great soul, O veteran, I conjure thee.
    Although the man who labours to repel
    Evils inflicted by Heaven’s wrath, is brave,
    Yet doth such courage border upon frenzy:
    For what the fates ordain, no god can frustrate.

    CHOR. While yet these arms retained their youthful strength,
    Had any one insulted thee, with ease
    Could I have quelled him; but I now am nothing:
    On thee, Amphytrion, therefore ’tis incumbent
    To think how best thou may’st henceforth ward off
    Th’ assaults of fortune.

    AMP.                    No unmanly fear,
    No wish to lengthen out this life, prevents
    My voluntary death: but I would save
    The children of my son, though I appear
    To grasp at things impossible. Behold
    I bare my bosom to the sword; pierce, slay,
    Or cast me from the rock. But I, O king,
    For this one favour sue to you; despatch
    Me and this hapless dame before the children,
    Lest them we view, most execrable sight,
    In death’s convulsive pangs, to her who bore them,
    And me their grandsire, shrieking out for aid.
    But as for all beside, do what you list,
    For we have now no bulwark which from death
    Can save us.

    MEG.        I entreat one favour more,
    Which to us both will equally be grateful.
    Permit me in funereal robes to dress
    My children; for that purpose be the gates
    Thrown open (for the palace now is closed
    Against us) that they from their father’s house
    This small advantage may obtain.

    LYC.                            Your wishes
    Shall be complied with. I my servants bid
    Unbar the gates. Go in, bedeck yourselves;
    The costly robes I grudge not: but no sooner
    Shall ye have put them on, than I to you
    Will come, and plunge you in the shades beneath.

                                              [_Exit_ LYCUS.

    MEG. Follow your hapless mother, O my children,
    To your paternal house, where, though our wealth
    Be in the hands of others, our great name
    We still preserve.

    AMP.              O Jove, ’twas then in vain
    That thou didst deign to share my nuptial couch,
    In vain too, of thy son have I been styled
    The father, for thou hast not proved the friend
    Thou didst appear to be. I, though a man,
    Exceed in virtue thee a mighty god;
    Because I to their foes have not betrayed
    The sons of Hercules: but thou, by stealth,
    Entering my chamber, to another’s wife
    Without permission cam’st; yet know’st not how
    To save thy friends; thou surely art a god
    Either devoid of wisdom, or unjust.

                          [_Exeunt_ AMPHITRYON _and_ MEGARA.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          For Linus’ death, by all the tuneful Nine
              Bewailed, doth Phœbus’ self complain,
          And loudly uttering his auspicious strain,
          Smite with a golden quill the lyre; but mine
              Shall be the task, while songs of praise
              I chaunt and twine the laureate wreath,
              His matchless fortitude t’ emblaze,
        Who sought hell’s inmost gloom, the dreary shades beneath;
          Whether I call the hero son of Jove,
              Or of Amphitryon; for the fame
          To which his labours have so just a claim,
          Must e’en in death attract the public love:
          In the Nemæan forest first he slew
              That lion huge, whose tawny hide
              And grinning jaws extended wide,
                He o’er his shoulders threw.

    I. 2.

          The winged arrows whizzing from his bow,
              Did on their native hills confound
          The Centaurs’ race with many a deadly wound:
          Alcides’ matchless strength doth Peneus know,
              Distinguished by his limpid waves,
              The fields laid waste of wide extent,
              With Pelion, and the neighbouring caves
        Of Homoles, uprooting from whose steep ascent,
          Tall pines that cast a venerable shade,
          The monsters armed their forceful hands,
          And strode terrific o’er Thessalia’s lands:
          Then breathless on th’ ensanguined plain he laid
          That hind distinguished by her golden horns,
              And still in Dian’s temple seen
              His prize, to glad the huntress queen,
                Oenöe’s walls adorns.

    II. 1.

          The chariot with triumphal ensigns graced
              Ascending, to his stronger yoke
          He Diomedes’ furious coursers broke,
          Scorning the bit, in hateful stalls who placed
              By their fell lord, the flesh of man
              Raging devoured, accursed food;
                A stream from their foul mangers ran,
        Filled with unholy gore, and many a gobbet crude.
          O’er Hebrus’ silver tide at the command
              Of Argos’ unrelenting king
          Eurystheus, he these captive steeds did bring,
          Close to Anauros’ mouth on Pelion’s strand.
          Inhuman Cycnus, son of Mars, next felt
              The force of his resounding bow,
              Unsocial wretch, the stranger’s foe,
                Who in Amphanea dwelt.

    II. 2.

          Then came he to th’ harmonious nymphs, that band
              Who in Hesperian gardens hold
          Their station, where the vegetative gold
          Glows in the fruitage; with resistless hand
              To snatch the apple from its height;
              The dragon wreathed his folds around
              The tree’s huge trunk, portentous sight,
      In vain; that monster fell transfixed with many a wound.
          Into those straits of the unfathomed main
              He entered, with auspicious gales,
          Where feared the mariner t’ unfurl his sails,
          And fixing limits to the watery plain
          His columns reared: then from the heavens’ huge load
              The wearied Atlas he relieved,
              His arm the starry realms upheaved,
                And propped the gods’ abode.

    III. 1.

          Foe to the Amazons’ equestrian race
              He crossed the boisterous Euxine tide,
          And gave them battle by Mæotis’ side.
          What friends through Greece collected he to face
              Hippolita, th’ intrepid maid,
              That he the belt of Mars might gain,
              And tissued robe with golden braid.
        Still doth exulting Greece the virgin’s spoils retain,
          Lodged in Mycene’s shrine, with gore imbrued,
              The dog of Lerna’s marshy plain,
          Who unresisting multitudes had slain,
          The hundred-headed hydra, he subdued,
          Aided by fire, and winged shafts combined,
              These from his well-stored quiver flew,
              And triple-formed Geryon slew,
                Fierce Erythræa’s hind.

    III. 2.

          But having finished each adventurous strife,
              At length in evil hour he steers
          To Pluto’s mansion, to the house of tears,
          The goal of labour, there to end his life,
              Thence never, never to return;
              His friends dismayed forsake these gates,
              In hopeless solitude we mourn.
        Hell’s stern award is passed, the boat of Charon waits
          To their eternal home his sons to bear,
              Most impious lawless homicide!
          For thee, O Hercules, thee erst his pride,
          Thy sire now looks with impotent despair.
          Had I the strength which I possessed of yore,
              I with my Theban friends, arrayed
              In brazen arms, thy sons would aid:
                But youth’s blest days are o’er.

    Clad in funereal vestments I behold
    The children of Alcides erst the great,
    With his loved wife and his decrepit sire
    Conducting them. O wretched me! no longer
    Can I restrain the fountain of these tears
    Which gush incessant from my aged eyes.

MEGARA, AMPHITRYON, CHORUS.

    MEG. Come on. What priest, what butcher is at hand
    To slay these wretched children, or transpierce
    My bosom? Now the victims stand prepared
    For their descent to Pluto’s loathed abode.
    By force, my children, are we borne along
    United in th’ unseemly bands of death;
    Decrepit age with helpless infancy
    And intermingled matrons. O dire fate
    Of me and of my sons, whom these sad eyes
    Shall never more behold! Alas! I bore,
    I nurtured you, to be the scorn, the sport,
    Of our inveterate foes, and by their hands
    To perish. Each fond hope, which from the words
    Of your departed father erst I formed,
    Hath proved fallacious. The deceased to _thee_
    Allotted Argos, in Eurystheus’ palace
    Wert _thou_ to dwell a mighty king, and wield
    The sceptre of Pelasgia’s fruitful land,
    Then with the lion’s hide himself had worn
    Thy front he covered: _you_ were to ascend
    The throne of Thebes for brazen chariots famed,
    Possessing my hereditary fields,
    Such were the hopes of your exulting sire,
    Who to _your_ hand consigned that ponderous mace
    Deceitful gift of Dædalus: on _thee_,
    Thou little one, he promised to bestow
    Oecalia, which his shafts had erst laid waste:
    To you all three, these realms in threefold portions
    Did he distribute; for your father’s views
    Were all magnanimous: but I marked out
    Selected consorts for you, and formed schemes
    Of new affinities, from the domains
    Of Athens, Sparta, and the Theban city;
    That binding up your cables, and secure
    From the tempestuous deep, ye might enjoy
    A happy life: these prospects now are vanished:
    For to your arms hath changeful Fortune given
    The Destinies to be your brides, while tears
    Are your unhappy mother’s lustral drops.
    Your grandsire celebrates the nuptial feast,
    O’er which he summons Pluto to preside,
    The father of your consorts. But, alas!
    Whom first of you my children, or whom last
    To this fond bosom shall I clasp, on whom
    Bestow a kiss, whom in my arms sustain?
    How like the bee with variegated wings
    Shall I collect the sorrows of you all,
    And blend the whole together in a flood
    Of tears exhaustless? O my dearest lord,
    If any of those spirits who reside
    In Pluto’s realms beneath, can hear the voice
    Of mortals, in these words to thee I speak:
    O Hercules, thy father and thy sons
    Are doomed to bleed; I perish too who erst
    On thy account was by the world called happy.
    Protect us, come, and to these eyes appear,
    Though but a ghost; thy presence will suffice:
    For these thy children’s murderers, when with thee
    Compared, are dastards.

    AMP.                    To appease the powers
    Of hell beneath, O woman, be thy care.
    But lifting to the skies my suppliant hands,
    I call on thee, O Jove, that, if thou mean
    To be a friend to these deserted children,
    Thou interpose without delay and save them,
    For soon ’twill be no longer in thy power:
    Thou oft hast been invoked; but all my prayers
    Are ineffectual; die, it seems, we must.
    But, O ye aged men, the bliss which life
    Can yield is small, contrive then how to pass
    As sweetly as is possible the hours
    Which fate allots you, e’en from morn till night
    Shaking off every grief: for Time preserves not
    Our hopes entire, but on his own pursuits
    Intent, deserts us, borne on rapid wings.
    Look but on me, amid the sons of men
    Conspicuous erst performing glorious deeds;
    And yet hath Fortune in one single day
    Taken all from me, like a feather wafted
    Into the trackless air. I know not him
    To whom collected stores of wealth or fame
    Are durable. Farewell, for this, my comrades,
    Is the last time ye shall behold your friend.

HERCULES, MEGARA, AMPHITRYON, CHORUS.

    MEG. Ha! O thou aged man, do I behold
    My dearest husband? How shall I find utterance?

    AMP. I know not, O my daughter; for I too
    Am with amazement seized.

    MEG.                      This sure is he
    Who as we heard was in the realms beneath;
    Else doth some vision in the noontide glare
    Delude our senses. But what frantic words
    Were those I spoke as if ’twas all a dream?
    This is no other than thy real son,
    Thou aged man. Come hither, O my children,
    Cling to your father’s robe, with speed advance,
    Quit not your hold, for ye in him shall find
    An equal to our great protector Jove.

    HER. All hail, thou mansion, and thou vestibule
    Of my abode; thee with what joy once more
    Do I behold, revisiting the light.
    Ha! what hath happened? I my children see
    With garlands on their temples, and my wife
    Amidst a throng of men, my father too
    Weeping for some mischance. I’ll go to them,
    And ask the cause. What recent ill, O woman,
    Hath happened to this house?

    MEG.                        My dearest lord,
    O thou who to thy aged father com’st
    A radiant light, in safety hast thou reached,
    At this important crisis, the abodes
    Of those thou lov’st.

    HER.                  What mean you by these words?
    What tumults, O my sire, are we involved in?

    MEG. We are undone; but, O thou aged man,
    Forgive, if I’ve anticipated that
    Thou would’st have said to him: for in some points
    Our sex are greater objects of compassion
    Than males. I deem my children dead; I too
    Am perishing.

    HER.          O Phœbus! with what preludes
    Do you begin your speech?

    MEG.                      My valiant brothers,
    And aged sire, alas! are now no more.

    HER. Who slew them, how, or with what weapon?

    MEG.                                        Lycus,
    The monarch of this city, was their murderer.

    HER. With arms did he oppose them, or prevail,
    When foul sedition through the land diffused
    Its pestilent contagion?

    MEG.                    By revolt
    He holds the sceptre of the Theban realm.

    HER. But wherefore hath this sudden panic reached
    You and my aged sire?

    MEG.                  He would have slain
    Thy father, me, and these defenceless children.

    HER. What mean you? could he fear my orphan race?

    MEG. Lest they hereafter might avenge the death
    Of Creon.

    HER.      But what garb is this they wear,
    Which suits some corse?

    MEG.                    Already in these vestments
    For our funereal rites are we arrayed.

    HER. And were ye on the point of perishing
    By violence? Ah me!

    MEG.                Our friends desert us;
    For we have heard that thou wert dead.

    HER.                                Whence rose
    This comfortless depression of the soul?

    MEG. Eurystheus’ heralds the sad tidings bore.

    HER. But for what cause did ye forsake my house,
    My sacred Lares?

    MEG.            From his bed thy sire
    Was forcibly dragged forth.

    HER.                        So void of shame
    Was Lycus as to treat his age with scorn?

    MEG. Shame dwells not near the shrine of brutal force.

    HER. Were we thus destitute of friends when absent?

    MEG. What friends abide with him who is unhappy?

    HER. But did they scorn the battles which I fought
    Against the Minyans?

    MEG.                I to thee repeat it,
    Calamity is friendless and forlorn.

    HER. Will ye not cast from your dishevelled hair
    These wreaths of Pluto? will ye not look up
    To yon bright sun, and ope your eyes to view
    Scenes far more pleasing than the loathsome shades
    Of hell beneath? But I, for wrongs like these
    Demand my vengeful arm, with speed will go
    And overturn the house of that new king,
    His impious head I to the ravenous hounds
    Lopped from his trunk will cast, and each base Theban
    Who with ingratitude repays my kindness
    With this victorious weapon smite: my shafts
    The rest shall scatter, till Ismenos’ channel
    Be choked up with the corses of the slain,
    And Dirce’s limpid fountain stream with gore.
    For whom, in preference to my wife, my children,
    And aged father, shall I aid? Farewell,
    Ye labours which unwittingly I strove
    T’ accomplish, mindless of these dearest pledges;
    In their defence I equally am bound
    To yield up life, if for their father they
    Were doomed to bleed. What! shall we call it noble
    To war against the hydra or the lion,
    And execute the mandates of Eurystheus,
    If I avert not my own children’s death?
    No longer else shall I, as erst, be styled
    Alcides the victorious.

    CHOR.                  It is just
    Parents should aid their sons, their aged sire,
    And the dear partner of the nuptial bed.

    AMP. My son, this mighty privilege is yours,
    To be the best of friends to those you love,
    And a determined foe to those you hate.
    But be not too impetuous.

    HER.                      In what instance
    Have I been hastier, O my honoured sire,
    Than it becomes me?

    AMP.                To support his cause,
    The king hath many, who in fact are poor,
    Though fame accounts them rich; they raised a tumult,
    And caused the ruin of the state, to plunder
    Their neighbours; for the fortunes they possessed
    Are through their own extravagance and sloth
    Reduced to nothing. As the gates you entered,
    These could not fail to see you: O beware
    Lest since you by your foes have been perceived,
    You perish when you least foresee your danger,
    Oppressed by numbers.

    HER.                  Though all Thebes beheld me,
    I care not. But when I descried a bird
    Of evil omen perched aloof, I knew
    That there had some calamity befallen
    My house, and therefore with presaging soul
    In secrecy I entered these domains.

    AMP. Draw near with pious awe, my son, salute
    The Lares, and display that welcome face
    In your paternal mansions. For to drag
    Your wife and children forth, with me your sire
    To murder us, the king himself will come.
    But all will prosper, if you here remain,
    And a secure asylum will you find,
    Nor through the city spread a loud alarm
    Ere your designs succeed.

    HER.                      Thus will I act,
    For thou hast rightly spoken; I am entering
    The palace. From the sunless caves beneath
    Of Proserpine, after a long delay
    Returning, first to our domestic gods
    Will I be mindful to address my vows.

    AMP. Have you indeed then visited the house
    Of Pluto, O my son?

    HER.                And thence the dog
    With triple-head brought to these realms of light.

    AMP. Conquered in battle, or on you bestowed
    By hell’s indulgent goddess?

    HER.                        I prevailed
    O’er him in combat, and have been so happy
    As to behold the far-famed mystic orgies.

    AMP. But is the beast lodged in Eurystheus’ palace?

    HER. Him Cthonia’s groves and Hermion’s walls
    confine.

    AMP. Knows not Eurystheus that you are returned
    Into this upper world?

    HER.                  He doth not know:
    For I came first to learn what passes here.

    AMP. But wherefore in the realms beneath, so long
    Did you remain?

    HER.            I there prolonged may stay,
    My sire, to bring back Theseus from the shades.

    AMP. And where is he, gone to his native land?

    HER. He went to Athens, pleased with his escape
    From the infernal regions. But attend
    Your father to the palace, O my sons,
    Which now ye enter in a happier state
    Than when ye left it: but take courage, cease
    To pour forth floods of tears; and, O my wife,
    Collect thyself, let all thy terrors cease,
    And loose my garments; for I have not wings,
    Nor would I vanish from my friends. Alas!
    Their hold they quit not, but cling faster still,
    And faster to my vest. Because ye stand
    Upon the verge of ruin, I will take
    And bear you hence, as by the ship light boats
    Are guided o’er the deep: for I refuse not
    The care my children claim. Here all mankind
    Are on a level, they of nobler rank
    And mean condition, to their progeny
    Bear equal love. The gifts of fortune vary,
    Some have abundant wealth, and some are poor;
    But the whole human race feels this attachment.

       [_Exeunt_ HERCULES _and_ MEGARA, _with the children_.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

              Youth is light, and free from care
              But now a burden on my head
          Heavier than Ætna’s rock, old age, I bear.
          Before these eyes its sable veil is spread.
          Not for the wealth of Asiatic kings,
          Or heaps of gold that touched yon roof sublime,
          Ere would I barter life’s enchanting prime;
              Hence wealth a brighter radiance flings,
              And poverty itself can charm:
              But thou, curst dotage, art the sum
          Of every fancied, every real harm;
          May’st thou be plunged beneath the deep, nor come
          To peopled town, or civilized abode,
        Go wing thy distant flight along th’ aërial road.

    I. 2.

              Did the gods with sapient care
              Mete out their bounty to mankind,
          The good, the gift of twofold youth should share
          Unquestioned token of a virtuous mind,
          Behold life’s son its blest career renew,
          While the degenerate sleep to wake no more.
          We by these means distinctly might explore
              Their merits with as clear a view,
              As sailors, who each starry spark
              Enumerate that adorns the skies.
          But now the gods have by no certain mark
          Directed whom we for their worth should prize,
          Whom shun as wicked: uninformed we live,
        Revolving time hath nought but plenteous wealth to give.

    II. 1.

              Mindful of its ancient themes,
              This faltering tongue shall ne’er refuse,
          Oft as I wander by their haunted streams,
          To blend each gentle grace and tuneful muse:
          O may I dwell among the harmonious choirs,
          My brows still circled with a laureate wreath!
          Still shall the bard, a hoary veteran, breathe
              The strains Mnemosuné inspires:
              While memory wakes, I ne’er will cease
              Th’ exploits of Hercules to sing;
          Where Bromius yields the purple vine’s increase,
          Where Libyan pipes and the lute’s sevenfold string
          Are heard in dulcet unison; to praise
        The Nine who aid the dance, I’ll wake my choral lays.

    II. 2.

              Delian virgins at the gate
              Assembled, festive pæans sing,
          The triumphs of Latona’s son relate,
          And nimbly vaulting form their beauteous ring.
          Into thy temple, by devotion led,
          O Phœbus, will I raise my parting breath;
          The swan thus warbles at the hour of death:
              Though hoary hairs my cheeks o’erspread.
              How great the hero’s generous love,
              Whose merits aid our votive song,
          Alcides the resistless son of Jove;
          Those trophies, which to noble birth belong
          By him are all surpassed, his forceful hand
        Restoring peace, hath cleansed this monster-teeming land.

LYCUS, AMPHITRYON, CHORUS.

    LYC. Forth from the portals at due season comes
    Amphitryon; for ’tis long since ye were decked
    In robes and trappings such as suit the dead.
    But go, command the children and the wife
    Of Hercules without these gates t’ appear,
    Because ye have engaged that ye will die
    By your own hands.

    AMP.              You persecute, O king,
    Me whom already fortune hath made wretched,
    And with sharp taunts insult my dying race:
    Although in power supreme, you ought to act
    With moderation; but since you impose
    This harsh necessity, we must submit,
    And execute your will.

    LYC.                  Where’s Megara?
    Where are the children of Alcmena’s son?

    AMP. To me she seems, as far as I can guess,
    From looking through the door——

    LYC.                        What grounds hast thou
    For this opinion?

    AMP.              In a suppliant posture
    To sit before the Lares.

    LYC.                    And implore them
    With unavailing plaints to save her life.

    AMP. In vain too calls she on her lord deceased.

    LYC. But he is absent, he can ne’er return.

    AMP. Unless some god should raise him up again.

    LYC. Go thou, and from the palace lead her hither.

    AMP. ’Twould make me an accomplice in the murder,
    If this I acted.

    LYC.            Since thy soul recoils,
    I, whom such idle scruples cannot move,
    Will with their mother bring the children forth.
    Follow my steps, my servants, that at length
    We may behold sweet peace succeed our toils.

                                              [_Exit_ LYCUS.

    AMP. Depart: for to that place the Fates ordain
    You now are on the road; perhaps the sequel
    Will be another’s province: but expect,
    Since you have done amiss, to suffer vengeance.
    He, O ye veterans, at a lucky hour
    Enters the palace, for on ambushed swords
    His feet will stumble, while the villain hopes
    Those he would murder are too near at hand
    To ’scape: but I will go to see him fall
    A breathless corse: for when our foe endures
    The just requital of his impious deeds,
    There is a joy resulting from his death.

                                         [_Exit_ AMPHITRYON.

    CHOR. Changed are our evil fortunes. To the shades
    He who was erst a mighty king descends.
    O justice, and ye dread vicissitudes
    Of fate, ordained by Heaven!

    1st SEMICHOR.                Thou art at length
    Gone thither, where by death thou for those taunts,
    With which thou o’er the virtuous didst exult,
    Shalt make atonement.

    2nd SEMICHOR.        My delight bursts forth
    In floods of tears: for now is come that day
    The tyrant deemed would never visit him.

    1st SEMICHOR. But let us also look into the palace,
    My aged friend, and mark if yonder miscreant
    Be punished as I wish.

    LYC. [_within._]        Ah me! ah me!

    CHOR. That melody most grateful to mine ear
    Beneath yon roofs commences; nor is death
    Far distant; for these cries the monarch utters
    Are but a prelude to the fatal stroke.

    LYC. [_within._] Ye realms of Cadmus, I through treachery perish!

    2nd SEMICHOR. Others have perished by that bloody hand.
    Since then the retribution thou endur’st
    Is just, endure it bravely.

    1st SEMICHOR.              Where is he
    Who uttered ’gainst the blest immortal powers
    His foolish blasphemies, and called the gods
    Too weak to punish him?

    2nd SEMICHOR.          That impious man
    Is now no more. Yon vaulted roofs are silent,
    Let us begin the harmonious choral lay;
    For, as I wished, our comrades prove victorious.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          The sumptuous banquet, with th’ enlivening dance
              Now every Theban shall employ;
              Dried are our tears, and past mischance
          Yields to the lyre abundant themes of joy:
              Stretched low in dust the tyrant lies;
              But he, who by an ancient right
              Obtains the sceptre, is our king;
          From Acheron’s loathed stream behold him rise,
          Revisiting the cheerful realms of light,
        And hope, unlooked for, doth fresh transports bring.

    I. 2.

          The gods take cognizance of broken trust,
              Nor are they deaf to holy prayer.
              On gold and fortune, power unjust
          Attends; man’s reason is too weak to bear
              The joint temptations. Heaven at length,
              Whose kind protection we invoke,
              Deigning with pity to behold
          Our woes, to the neglected laws their strength
          Restoring, with vindictive fury broke
        The sable car which bore the god of gold.

    II. 1.

          Now let the flowery wreath, the victor’s pride,
          Adorn Ismenos; let each street employ
              The hours in dance and social joy;
          Let Dirce from the silver wave arise,
          And old Asopus’ daughters by her side,
              Forsaking their paternal stream,
              Conspire to aid our rapturous theme,
          And for Alcides claim the victor’s prize.
          Ye Pythian rocks, with waving forests crowned,
          And seats of Helicon’s melodious choir,
              Come every nymph, with cheerful sound,
          Visit these walls which to the clouds aspire;
          In helmed crop here warriors filled the plains.
        Whose lineage undecayed from age to age remains.

    II. 2.

          O ye, the partners of one nuptial bed,
          Happy Amphitryon, sprung from mortal race,
              And Jove, who rushed to the embrace
          Of bright Alcmena; for of thee aright,
          Though erst, O Jove, I doubted, was it said
              Thou didst enjoy that beauteous dame;
              With the renown his triumphs claim,
          Time through the world displays Alcides’ might,
          Emerged from grisly Pluto’s realms abhorred,
          Who quits the darksome caverns of the earth,
              To me a far more welcome lord,
          Than yon vile tyrant of ignoble birth.
          Now to the bloody strife we lift our eyes;
        The vengeful sword is bared, if Justice haunt the skies.

    SEMICHOR. Ha! are we all by the same panic seized?
    My aged friends, what spectre, hovering o’er
    The palace, do I see? Those tardy feet
    Raise from the ground, precipitate thy flight,
    Be gone.—From me, O Pæan, mighty king,
    Avert these evils.

IRIS, A FIEND, CHORUS.

    IRIS.                O, ye aged men,
    Be not dismayed: the fiend whom ye behold
    Is daughter of old Night, and I am Iris,
    The gods’ ambassadress. We are not come
    To harm your city; for we only war
    Against one man, who, sprung ’tis said from Jove
    And from Alcmena: till he had performed
    Severest labours, fate preserved his life;
    Nor did his father Jove permit, or me,
    Or Juno, e’er to hurt him: but, each toil
    Eurystheus’ hate enjoined, now he hath finished,
    Those oft-polluted hands with recent gore
    Will Juno stain, by urging him to slay
    His children: in this scheme I too conspire.
    Come on then, armed with a relentless heart,
    Unwedded daughter of the pitchy Night;
    Instil into that hero’s breast such frenzy
    As shall o’erturn his reason, and constrain him
    To perpetrate this murder; his wild steps
    Goad onward, throw the bloody cable forth,
    That having sent this band of graceful sons,
    Slain by their father’s arm, adown the gulf
    Of Acheron, th’ effects of Juno’s wrath
    And mine, he may experience; for the gods
    Would be mere things of no account, but great
    Would be the power of man, if he escaped
    Unpunished.

    FIEND.      I from noble parents spring,
    Night is my mother; and that blood which streamed
    From the foul wound of Ouranus, my sire:
    To me belongs this praise, I ’gainst my friend
    No envious rancour feel, nor with delight
    Invade them; but this counsel would suggest
    To you and Juno, ere I see you rush
    Into a fatal error, if my words
    Can move you: he into whose house you send me
    Is not obscure, or in the realms beneath,
    Or yet among the gods: for when o’er lands,
    Impervious erst, and o’er the stormy waves,
    He had established peace, he to the gods
    Their ancient honours, which by impious men
    Had been abolished, singly did restore.
    I therefore would dissuade you from contriving
    ’Gainst him these mischiefs.

    IRIS.                        Blame not thou the schemes
    Devised by Juno and by me.

    FIEND.                    Your steps
    Into a better path, from that which leads
    To evil, would I turn.

    IRIS.                  The wife of Jove
    Sent thee not hither to act thus discreetly.

    FIEND. Witness, thou sun, reluctant I obey.
    But if constrained to be the instrument
    Of Juno’s wrath and yours, I with such speed
    As when the hounds obey the huntsman’s voice,
    Your signal will attend; nor shall the deep
    Upheaving with a groan its troubled waves,
    The earthquake, or the thunderbolt, whose blast
    Is winged with fate, outstrip me, when I rush
    Into the breast of Hercules: the gates
    Will I burst open, and assail the house,
    First causing his devoted sons to bleed;
    Nor shall their murderer know that his own hand
    Slew those whom he begot, till he is rescued
    From the distraction I inspire. Behold
    He at the barrier stands, and shakes his head,
    And rolls in silence his distorted eyes,
    Flaming with anger. To contain his breath
    No longer able, like a bull, prepared
    To make the terrible assault, he bellows,
    And calls the Furies from the dire abyss
    Of Tartarus. Thee I to a greater height
    Of frenzy soon will rouse, and through thy soul
    Cause my terrific clarion to resound.
    O noble Iris, to Olympus’ height
    Now wing your swift career, while I, unseen,
    Will enter the abodes of Hercules.

                             [_Exeunt_ IRIS _and the_ FIEND.

    CHOR. Thou city, groan; thy choicest flower,
    The son of Jove, is cropped: O Greece,
    Thy benefactor’s fatal hour
    Impends. To thee for ever lost,
    Assailed by that infernal pest,
    The dauntless chief, deprived of peace,
    Shall feel his agonizing breast
    With horrible distraction tossed.
    Hence in her brazen chariot went
    The raging fiend, on mischief bent;
    She urges with a scorpion goad
    Her steeds along th’ ethereal road.
    That hundred-headed child of Night.
    With all those hissing snakes around,
    From her envenomed eyeballs bright
    The Gorgon thus directs the wound.
    Soon changed by Heaven’s supreme decree,
    Is man’s short-lived felicity.
    Ye infants, soon shall ye expire,
    Slain by your own distracted sire.
    Ah me! thy son, without delay,
    Shall be left childless, mighty Jove;
    For on his tortured soul shall prey
    Yon fiend, and by the powers above
    Vengeance commissioned to destroy.
    O mansion erst the scene of joy!
    To form a prelude to this dance,
    Neither the cheering timbrel’s sound,
    Nor sportive Menades advance;
    Here human gore shall stream around,
    Instead of that refreshing juice,
    Which Bacchus’ purple grapes produce.
    Away, ye children, danger’s nigh,
    For he who wakes this hostile strain,
    Traces your footsteps as ye fly;
    Nor will the fiend with fruitless rage,
    A war beneath those mansions wage.
    Alas! we sink o’erwhelmed with woe,
    My tears shall never cease to flow.
    I wail the grandsire hoar with age,
    The mother too who bore that train
    Of lovely children, but in vain.
    Lo, what a tempest shakes the wall,
    And makes th’ uprooted mansion fall!
    What mean’st thou, frantic son of Jove?
    The hellish uproar thou dost raise,
    Filling the palace with amaze,
    Is such as vexed the realms above,
    Till issuing with victorious might,
    Pallas invincible in fight
    The huge Enceladus oppressed,
    And piled all Ætna on his breast.

MESSENGER, CHORUS.

    MES. O ye whose heads are whitened o’er with age!

    CHOR. Why dost thou call me with so loud a voice?

    MES. Atrocious are the mischiefs which have happened
    Within the palace.

    CHOR.              I need now call in
    No other seer. The boys are slain. Ah me!

    MES. Indulge your groans, for such events as these
    Demand them.

    CHOR.        By a foe, e’en by the hand
    Of their own sire, in whom that foe they found.

    MES. No tongue can utter woes beyond what we
    Have suffered.

    CHOR.          What account hast thou to give
    Of the dire fate the father on his sons
    Inflicted? Sent by the avenging gods,
    Say why such mischiefs visited this house,
    And how the children miserably fell.

    MES. To purify the house were victims brought
    Before Jove’s altar, after Hercules
    Had slain and cast the monarch of this land
    Forth from these doors. Beside the victor stood
    His band of graceful children, with his sire
    And Megara. The sacred vase was borne
    Around the altar: from ill-omened words
    We all abstained. But while Alcmena’s son
    In his right hand a kindled torch sustained,
    Ready to dip it in the lustral water,
    He made a silent stand; on this delay
    The children steadfastly observed their sire,
    But he no longer was the same; his eyes
    Were seized with strong convulsions, from their fibres
    Blood started forth, his bearded cheeks with foam
    Were covered: he midst bursts of laughter wild
    Cried: “Wherefore need I kindle, O my father,
    The fire for sacrifice, ere I have slain
    Eurystheus, in a double toil engaged,
    When I at once might better finish all?
    Soon as I hither bring Eurystheus’ head,
    These hands which reek already with the gore
    Of Lycus, will I cleanse. Pour forth those waters
    Upon the ground, and cast your urns away.
    Who brings my bow, my club? I to Mycene
    Will go: let spades and levers be prepared,
    That I from their foundations may o’erturn
    Those walls which with the plummet and the line
    The Cyclops reared.” Then eager to depart,
    Although he had no chariot, yet he talked
    As if he had one, fancying that he mounted
    The seat, and with his hand as with a thong
    Drove the ideal steeds. His servants laughed,
    And at the same time trembled; till one cried
    (As on each other they with eager eyes
    Were gazing), “Doth my master sport with us,
    Or is he frantic?” Meanwhile through the palace
    Backward and forward he with hasty step
    Was walking: but no sooner did he reach
    That spacious hall, where at the genial board
    The men are wont t’ assemble, than he said
    That he was come to Nisus’ ancient city,
    And to th’ imperial dome: and on the floor,
    As if reclining at the genial board,
    Bade us set forth the banquet. But the pause
    Which intervened was short, ere he exclaimed,
    That he was traversing the Isthmian rocks
    O’ergrown with woods; then casting off his mantle
    He strove though there was no antagonist
    With whom to strive, proclaimed himself the victor,
    The name of that imaginary foe
    Announcing, over whom he had prevailed:
    But ’gainst Eurystheus he anon did utter
    Menaces the most horrible, and talk
    As if he at Mycene had been present.
    His father strove to hold his vigorous arm,
    And said to him; “What mean you, O my son?
    What wanderings into distant realms are these?
    Hath not the blood of him you have just slain
    Distracted you?” Then for Eurystheus’ sire
    Mistaking his own father, as he strove
    To touch his hand, repelled the trembling suppliant:
    Against his sons, the quiver and the bow,
    Thinking to slay the children of Eurystheus,
    He next made ready; they with terror smitten
    Ran different ways; the first beneath the robes
    Of his unhappy mother skulked; a second
    Flew to the shade the lofty column formed:
    Under the altar quivering like a bird,
    The last concealed himself: their mother cried,
    “What mean’st thou, O thou father, would’st thou slay
    Thy sons?” Amphitryon too, that aged man,
    And all the servants shrieked. But round the pillar
    The boy pursuing, he at length turned short,
    And meeting him, as foot to foot they stood,
    Transfixed his liver with a deadly shaft;
    Supine he fell, and with his streaming gore
    Distained the sculptured pillars, at whose base
    He breathed his last. But, with a shout, Alcides
    Uttered these boasts: “One of Eurystheus’ brood
    Slain by this arm, for the inveterate hate
    His father bore me, to atone, here lies
    A breathless corse.” Against another then,
    Who to the basis of the altar fled,
    And hoped to ’scape unseen, he bent his bow;
    But ere he gave the wound, the wretched youth
    Fell at his father’s knees, stretched forth his hands
    To touch his chin, or twine around his neck,
    And cried: “O spare my life, my dearest sire,
    Yours, I am yours indeed; nor will you slay
    Eurystheus’ son.” But he with glaring eyes
    Looked like a Gorgon, while the boy pressed on
    So close, he had no scope to aim the shaft,
    But as the smith the glowing anvil smites,
    Full on his auburn tresses he discharged
    The ponderous mace, the crashing bones gave way.
    Scarce had he slain the second, when he ran
    To butcher his third son o’er both their corses:
    But the unhappy mother in her arms
    Caught up, into an inner chamber bore
    The child, and closed the doors: but he, as if
    He had indeed been at the Cyclops’ city,
    With levers from their hinges forced them, pierced
    His wife and offspring with a single shaft,
    And then to slay his aged father rushed
    With speed impetuous: but a spectre came,
    Which to our eyes the awful semblance bore
    Of Pallas brandishing her pointed spear,
    And threw a rocky fragment at the breast
    Of Hercules, which checked his murderous frenzy,
    And plunged him into sleep. Upon the ground
    Headlong he fell, where ’midst the ruins lay,
    Rent from its pedestal a broken column:
    But rallying from our flight, we, by his sire
    Assisted, to the pillar bound him fast
    With thongs, that on his wakening from this trance
    He might commit no more atrocious deeds.
    There doth he taste an inauspicious sleep,
    First having slain his children and his consort.
    I know no mortal more completely wretched.

                                          [_Exit_ MESSENGER.

    CHOR. There was a murder in the Argive land
    Most wondrous and unparalleled through Greece
    In days of yore, which the confederate daughters
    Of Danaus perpetrated; but their crimes
    By the dire fate of Progne’s only son
    Were far surpassed. I of a bloody deed
    Now speak which they committed, they whose voice
    Equals the Muses’ choir; but thou who spring’st
    From Jove himself, hast in thy frenzy slain
    All thy three sons; for them what groans, what tears,
    What invocations to the shades beneath,
    Or songs shall I prepare to soothe the rage
    Of grisly Pluto? Shivered on the ground
    The portals of that lofty mansion view,
    Behold the corses of the children stretcht
    Before their miserable sire, whose senses,
    Since he hath slain them, in profoundest sleep
    Are buried. Mark those knotty cords around
    The brawny limbs of Hercules, entwined
    And to the columns in the palace fixed.
    But old Amphitryon, like a bird who wails
    Over its callow brood, with tardy step
    Comes hither in the bitterness of grief.

AMPHITRYON, CHORUS.

           _The Palace gates thrown open, discover_ HERCULES
             _stretched on the ground and sleeping_.

    AMP. Ye aged Thebans, will ye not be silent,
    Will ye not suffer him dissolved in sleep
    His miseries to forget?

    CHOR.                  These tears, these groans,
    To you, O venerable man, I pay,
    To those slain children, and the chief renowned
    For his victorious conflicts.

    AMP.                          Farther still
    Retire; forbear, forbear those clamorous sounds,
    Lest his repose ye break, and from a trance
    The sleeper rouse.

    CHOR.              How dreadful was this slaughter!

    AMP. Ha! ha! begone, for he in wild confusion
    Is starting up. Why will ye not lament,
    Ye aged men, in a more gentle tone?
    Lest roused from sleep he burst his chains, destroy
    The city, smite his sire, and with the ground
    Lay these proud mansions level.

    CHOR.                                  This I hold
    Impossible.

    AMP.        Be silent, I will mark
    Whether he breathe: O let me place my ear
    Still closer.

    CHOR.        Sleeps he?

    AMP.                    An accursed repose,
    Alas! he tastes, who hath his consort slain,
    And slain his sons with that resounding bow.

    CHOR. Now wail.

    AMP.            I wail those children’s fate.

    CHOR.                                        Your son,
    Alas! old man, our equal pity claims.

    AMP. Observe strict silence, for again he rises
    And turns around: I will conceal myself
    Beneath that roof.

    CHOR.              Be of good cheer: night seals
    The eyelids of your son.

    AMP.                    Mark, mark me well,
    I am so wretched that without reluctance
    I can bid life adieu: but if he kill
    Me too who am his father, guilt on guilt
    Shall he accumulate, and join the stings
    Of parricide to those which from the Furies
    Who haunt him, he already doth endure.

    CHOR. Better you then had died, when you prepared
    T’ avenge the slaughtered brothers of Alcmena,
    And stormed the fortress of the Taphian isle.

    AMP. Fly, leave the palace instantly; avoid
    That frantic man, who from his sleep is roused,
    For adding soon fresh slaughter to the past,
    With Bacchanalian transport shall he range
    Through Cadmus’ city.

    CHOR.                Why hast thou, O Jove,
    Hated thy son so bitterly, and plunged him
    Into this sea of troubles?

    HER. [_waking._]            Ha! I breathe,
    And view each wonted object, air, and earth,
    And these bright solar beams. Into what storm,
    What dreadful perturbation of the soul
    Have I been plunged! all heated I transpire,
    Not from my lungs, but from my feverish heart.
    Behold me! wherefore am I bound with chains,
    Like a disabled ship towed into haven,
    And by this youthful chest and nervous arm
    Joined to a broken pillar? Here I sit
    Contiguous to the corses of the slain;
    My winged shafts lie scattered on the ground,
    With that unerring bow which erst I bore
    In war to guard me, and with care preserved.
    Sent by Eurystheus, am I then arrived
    A second time at the drear shades beneath?
    Neither the rock of Sisyphus, nor Pluto,
    Nor Ceres’ sceptred daughter, do I see.
    I sure am stricken senseless with amazement,
    And know not where I am. But ho! what friend
    Is near, or at a distance, who will come
    To give me information? For each object
    Which I was erst acquainted with seems strange.

    AMP. Shall I approach this scene of my afflictions
    Ye aged men?

    CHOR.        I will attend your steps,
    Nor meanly in calamity betray you.

    HER. Why dost thou weep, my sire, and veil those eyes,
    Retiring far from thy beloved son?

    AMP. My son—for though unhappy, you are mine.

    HER. But what calamity do I endure
    That causes thee to shed these tears?

    AMP.                                  Your woes
    Are such, that any god, if he endured
    The same, would groan.

    HER.                  This hath a dreadful sound:
    But you, my fortunes have not yet explained.

    AMP. Because if you your senses have recovered,
    Yourself behold them.

    HER.                  Tell me what thou mean’st—
    If to my charge thou lay’st some recent crime.

    AMP. If you no longer to the powers of hell
    Are subjected, the truth will I unfold.

    HER. Alas! how darkly thou again allud’st
    To what my soul suspects.

    AMP.                      Your looks I watch
    To see if reason wholly be restored.

    HER. I recollect not that I e’er was frantic.

    AMP. [_to the_ CHORUS.]
    Shall I unbind the shackles of my son,
    Or how must we proceed?

    HER.                    Say who was he
    That bound me? for with scorn have I been treated.

    AMP. Thus much of your afflictions may you know:
    Forbear all farther questions.

    HER.                          Is thy silence
    Sufficient then to teach me what I wish
    To learn?

    AMP.      O Jove, dost thou behold the curses
    Hurled on thy son from envious Juno’s throne?

    HER. What dire effects of her inveterate rage
    Have I endured?

    AMP.            Of that vindictive goddess
    No longer think: but to your own afflictions
    Attend.

    HER.    Alas! I utterly am ruined!
    What farther ill wouldst thou disclose?

    AMP.                                    See there
    The corses of your murdered children lie.

    HER. Alas! what dreadful objects strike these eyes!

    AMP. My son, against your progeny you waged
    An inauspicious war.

    HER.                Why talk of war?
    Who slew them?

    AMP.          You, your arrows, and the cause
    Of all these mischiefs, that remorseless goddess.

    HER. What mean’st thou, or what crime have I committed,
    My father, O thou messenger of ill?

    AMP. By frenzy urged. But you such questions ask,
    As I with grief must answer.

    HER.                        Have I murdered
    My consort also?

    AMP.            All these deeds of horror
    That single arm did perpetrate.

    HER.                            Alas!
    A cloud of griefs surrounds me.

    AMP.                            For this cause
    Your fortunes I lament.

    HER.                    Have I demolished
    My own house too, with Bacchanalian rage
    Inspired?

    AMP.      The whole of what I know amounts
    To this, that you are most completely wretched.

    HER. Where did this fatal madness seize me first?

    AMP. As round the altar, you, a flaming brand,
    To expiate the foul murder which distains
    Your hands, were bearing.

    HER.                      Ah! why lengthen out
    A guilty life, when of my dearest children
    I am become the murderer? Why delay
    To leap from the high rock, or with a sword
    Transpierce this bosom, on myself their blood
    Avenging? or t’ avert that infamy
    Which waits me, shall I rush into the flames?
    But Theseus comes to bar these desperate counsels,
    My kinsman and my friend; in a true light
    To him shall I appear, and the pollution
    I have incurred by slaying my own sons
    Will be conspicuous to my dearest comrade.
    What shall I do? or where can I find out
    A solitude impervious to my woes?
    On rapid wings, O could I mount, or plunge
    Into the nether regions of the earth?
    Give me a veil to darken o’er my head.
    For ’tis with shame I think on the offence
    Caused by this deed: but to myself alone
    Ascribing the defilement of their blood,
    I wish not to contaminate the guiltless.

THESEUS, AMPHITRYON, HERCULES, CHORUS.

    THE. An armed squadron of Athenian youths
    I hither bring, who near Asopus’ stream
    Are stationed to assist your son in battle.
    For to the city of Erectheus’ race
    A rumour came, that Lycus, having seized
    The sceptre of this land, is waging war
    ’Gainst you. O aged man, I to repay
    The benefits which Hercules conferred
    On me, whom from the deary shades beneath
    In safety he redeemed, on your behalf
    Attend, if of this arm, or of my troops,
    Ye need the help. But, ha, what means the floor
    With weltering corses heaped? hath my design
    Proved ineffectual? am I then arrived
    Too late to remedy the dreadful mischiefs
    Which have already ta’en effect? who slew
    Those children, or whose consort was the dame
    Whom I behold? for where the boys are laid,
    No signs appear of any battle fought:
    But sure I of some other recent ill
    Now make discovery.

    AMP.                O thou goddess, throned
    Upon that hill where verdant olives spring.

    THE. Why speak you to me in this piteous tone,
    And with such prelude?

    AMP.                  Grievous are the ills
    Which we endure through Heaven’s severe behest.

    THE. What boys are they o’er whose remains you weep?

    AMP. Them did my miserable son beget,
    And when begotten slay, this impious murder
    He dared to perpetrate.

    THE.                    Express yourself
    In more auspicious terms.

    AMP.                      I wish t’ obey
    Th’ injunctions thou hast given.

    THE.                            What dreadful words
    Are these which you have uttered?

    AMP.                              In a moment
    Were we undone.

    THE.            What mean you, what hath happened?

    AMP. This frenzy seized him sprinkled with the venom,
    Which from the hundred-headed hydra flowed.

    THE. Such Juno’s wrath. But who, O aged man,
    Stands ’mong the dead?

    AMP.                  My son, my valiant son,
    Inured to many toils, who in that war
    Where earth’s gigantic brood were slain, advanced
    Among the gods to the Phlegræan field
    Armed with his buckler.

    THE.                    Ah, what mighty chief
    Was e’er so wretched?

    AMP.                  Scarcely shalt thou know
    A man with greater labours vexed, and doomed
    To wander through more regions.

    THE.                            But why veils he
    Beneath that robe his miserable head?

    AMP. Because thy presence, friendship’s sacred ties
    Added to those of kindred, and the gore
    Of his slain children, fill his soul with shame.

    THE. I with his griefs am come to sympathize;
    Uncover him.

    AMP.        That garment from your eyes
    Remove, display your visage to the sun.
    It ill becomes my dignity to weep:
    Yet I a suppliant strive to touch your beard,
    Your knees, your hand, and shed these hoary tears.
    O curb your soul, my son, whose fierceness equals
    That of the lion, else ’twill hurry you
    To bloody impious rage, and make you add
    Mischiefs to mischiefs.

    THE.                    Ho! on thee I call,
    On thee, who to that seat of misery seem’st
    Fast riveted; permit thy friends to see
    Thy face: for darkness hath no cloud so black
    As to conceal thy woes. Why dost thou wave
    Thy hand and point to those whom thou hast slain,
    Lest by this converse I pollute myself?
    I am not loth to share thy woes; I erst
    Was happy (which my soul is ever bound
    To recollect with gratitude) when thou
    From hell’s loathed gloom, the mansion of the dead,
    Didst safely bear me to the realms of light.
    For I abhor th’ attachment of those friends
    Which time impairs, him too who would enjoy
    Their better fortunes, but refuse to sail
    In the same bark with those who prove unblest.
    Rise up, unveil thy miserable head
    And look on me. A noble mind sustains
    Without reluctance what the gods inflict.

    HER. Did you, O Theseus, see me slay my children?

    THE. I heard, and now behold the ills thou speak’st of.

    HER. Then why didst thou uncover to the sun
    My guilty head?

    THE.            Why not? canst thou, a man,
    Pollute the gods?

    HER.              Avaunt, O wretch, avaunt,
    For I am all contagion.

    THE.                    To a friend
    No mischief from his friend can be transmitted.

    HER. Your conduct I applaud, nor will deny
    That I have served you.

    THE.                    I who erst received
    Those favours at thy hands, now pity thee.

    HER. I am indeed an object of your pity,
    From having slain my sons.

    THE.                      For thee I weep,
    Because to me thou heretofore wert kind
    When vexed by other ills.

    HER.                      Did you e’er meet
    With those who were more wretched?

    THE.                              Thy afflictions
    Are of such giant bulk, that they to heaven
    Reach from this nether world.

    HER.                          Hence am I ready
    For instant death.

    THE.              Canst thou suppose the gods
    Regard thy threats?

    HER.                Self-willed are they and cruel,
    And I defy the gods.

    THE.                Restrain thy tongue,
    Lest thou by uttering such presumptuous words
    Increase thy sufferings.

    HER.                    I with woes am fraught
    Already, nor remains there space for more.

    THE. But what design’st thou? whither art thou borne
    With frantic rage?

    HER.              In death will I return
    To those abodes beneath, whence late I came.

    THE. Thou speak’st the language of a vulgar man.

    HER. Exempt from all calamity yourself,
    On me these admonitions you bestow.

    THE. Are these fit words for Hercules to use,
    Who many toils endured?

    HER.                    I had not suffered
    Thus much, if any bounds had circumscribed
    My labours.

    THE.        Benefactor of mankind,
    And their great friend?

    HER.                    From them no aid I find;
    But Juno triumphs.

    THE.              Greece will not permit thee
    To perish unregarded.

    HER.                  Hear me now,
    That I with reason your advice may combat;
    To you will I explain both why it is
    And long hath been impossible for me
    To live; and first, because from him, I spring,
    Who, having slain the father of Alcmena,
    Defiled with murder, wedded her who bore me.
    When thus the basis of a family
    Is laid in guilt, the children must be wretched.
    But Jove (or some one who assumed the name
    Of Jove) begot me; hence to Juno’s hate
    Was I obnoxious. Yet, O let not this
    Offend thine ear, old man, for thee, not Jove,
    I deem my real sire. While yet I hung
    An infant at the breast, Jove’s wife by stealth
    Sent snakes into my cradle to destroy me.
    But after I attained the bloom of manhood,
    Of what avail were it, should I recount
    The various labours I endured, what lions,
    What typhons with a triple form, what giants,
    Or what four-footed centaurs, who in crowds
    Rushed to the battle, by this arm were slain?
    How I despatched the hydra too, that monster
    With heads surrounded, branching out anew,
    And having suffered many toils beside,
    Went to the mansions of the dead, to bring
    Hell’s triple-headed dog into the realms
    Of light, for thus Eurystheus had enjoined?
    But I at last, wretch that I am, this murder
    Did perpetrate, and my own children slay,
    That to their utmost summit I might raise
    The miseries of this house. My fate is such
    That in my native Thebes I must not dwell:
    But if I here continue, to what temple
    Or friends can I repair? for by such curses
    I now am visited, that none will dare
    To speak to me. To Argos shall I go?
    How can I, when my country drives me forth?
    To any other city should I fly,
    The consequence were this: with looks askance
    I should be viewed as one well known, and harassed
    With these reproaches by malignant tongues:
    “Is not this he, the son of Jove, who murdered
    His children and his consort? from this land
    Shall not th’ accursed miscreant be expelled?”
    To him who was called happy once, such change
    Is bitterness indeed: as for the man
    Whose sufferings are perpetual, him, when wretched,
    No kinsman pities. I to such a pitch
    Of woe shall come, I deem, at length, that earth,
    Uttering a voice indignant, will forbid me
    To touch its surface, ocean, o’er its waves,
    And every river, o’er its streams, to pass.
    I shall be like Ixion then, with chains
    Fixed to the wheel. ’Twere better that no Greek
    With whom I in my happier days conversed
    Should see me more. What motive can I have
    For living? or to me of what avail
    Were it to keep possession of this useless
    And this unholy being? flushed with joy,
    Let Jove’s illustrious consort, in the dance,
    Strike with her sandals the resplendent floor
    Of high Olympus: for she now hath gained
    Her utmost wish, and from his basis torn
    The first of Grecian warriors. Who can pray
    To such a goddess, who, with envy stung,
    Because Jove loved a woman, hath destroyed
    The benefactors of the Grecian realm,
    Those blameless objects of her hate?

    THE.                                This mischief
    Springs from no god except the wife of Jove.
    Well dost thou judge, in saying that ’tis easier
    To give thee wholesome counsel, than endure
    Such agonies. But no man ’scapes unwounded
    By fortune, and no god; unless the songs
    Of ancient bards mislead. Have not the gods
    Among themselves formed lawless marriages?
    Have they not bound in ignominious chains
    Their fathers, to obtain a throne? In heaven
    Yet dwell they, and bear up beneath the load
    Of all their crimes. But what canst thou allege,
    If thou, frail mortal as thou art, those ills
    Immoderately bewail’st to which the gods
    Without reluctance yield? from Thebes retire,
    Since thus the laws ordain; and follow me
    To Pallas’ city: when thy hands are there
    Cleansed from pollution, I to thee will give
    A palace, and with thee divide my wealth.
    The presents which the citizens to me
    Appropriated, when twice seven blooming victims
    I by the slaughter of the Cretan bull
    Redeemed, on thee will I bestow. For portions
    Of land are through the realm to me assigned:
    These, while thou liv’st henceforth shall by thy name
    Be called: but after death, when to the shades
    Of Pluto thou descend’st, with sacrifice
    And with the sculptured tomb, shall Athens grace
    Thy memory. For her citizens have gained
    This fairest wreath from every Grecian state,
    By yielding succour to the virtuous man
    Their glories are augmented: and to thee
    Will I repay with gratitude the kindness
    Which thou deserv’st for saving me; for thou
    Hast need of friends at present: but no friend
    Is wanted when the gods confer renown;
    For, if he wills, Jove’s aid is all-sufficient.

    HER. You hold a language foreign to my griefs.
    But I suppose not that the gods delight
    In lawless nuptials, that their hands are bound
    With galling chains, nor did I e’er believe,
    Nor can I be convinced, that one bears rule
    Over another. For a deity
    If he be truly such, can stand in need
    Of no support. But by some lying bard
    Those miserable fables were devised.
    Although I am most wretched, yet I thought
    I might be charged with cowardice for leaving
    These realms of light. For he who bears not up
    ’Gainst adverse fortune, never can withstand
    The weapon of his foe. I am resolved
    To wait for death with firmness: to your city
    Meantime will I retreat, and am most grateful
    For your unnumbered gifts. Unnumbered labours
    Have I been erst acquainted with; from none
    Did I e’er shrink, these eyes did never stream
    With tears, nor thought I that I e’er should come
    To such a pitch of meanness as to weep:
    But now, it seems, must Fortune be obeyed.
    I am content. Thou, O my aged sire,
    Behold’st my exile, thou in me behold’st
    The murderer of my children: to the tomb
    Consign their corses with funereal pomp,
    And o’er them shed the tributary tear:
    For me the laws allow not to perform
    This office. Let their mother, e’en in death,
    Clasp to her breast, and in her arms sustain,
    Our wretched offspring, whom in evil hour
    I slew reluctant. But when thou with earth
    Hast covered them, thy residence still keep
    Here in this city, miserably indeed,
    Yet on thy soul lay this constraint, to bear
    With me the woes which I most deeply feel.
    The very sire, ye children, who begot,
    Murdered you; no advantage ye derive
    From what this arm by all my labours gained,
    And from your father’s triumphs no renown.
    Have not I slain thee too who didst preserve
    My bed inviolate, and o’er my house
    Long watch with patient care? Ah me! my wife,
    My sons: but how much more to be lamented
    Am I myself, from them for ever torn?
    Ye melancholy joys of kisses lavished
    On their remains, and ye my loathed companions,
    The weapons which I still retain, but doubt
    Whether to keep or dash them to the ground;
    For they, while at my side they hang, will seem
    To utter these reproachful words: “With us
    Thy consort and thy children hast thou slain,
    Yet thou the very instruments preserv’st
    Which were their murderers.” After such a charge
    Can I still bear them? what can I allege?
    But stripping off those arms with which through Greece
    I have achieved full many glorious deeds,
    Shall I expose myself to those who hate me,
    And die ignobly? I must not abandon
    But keep them still, though sorrowing. Aid me, Theseus,
    In this one enterprise; to Argos go
    And for your friend obtain the great reward
    Promised for dragging from the shades of hell
    That execrable hound: lest if by you
    Deserted, I through grief for my slain children
    Should come to some calamitous end. Thou realm
    Of Cadmus, and ye citizens of Thebes,
    With tresses shorn, in concert weep; the tomb
    Of my slain children visit, there bewail,
    In one funereal dirge, the dead, and me;
    For smitten with the same dire scourge of fate
    By Juno, we all perish.

    THE.                    Hapless man,
    Arise; enough of tears.

    HER.                    I cannot rise,
    These limbs are now grown stiff.

    THE.                            Calamity
    Subdues the valiant.

    HER.                Would I were a stone,
    Insensible to sufferings!

    THE.                      Cease these plaints;
    And to the friend who comes to serve thee, give
    Thy hand.

    HER.      But let me not wipe off the blood
    Upon your garments.

    THE.                Wipe it off, nor scruple,
    For I object not.

    HER.              Of my sons bereft,
    In you the likeness of a son I find.

    THE. Fling round my neck thine arm: I’ll lead the way.

    HER. A pair of friends: though one of us be wretched.
    Such, O my aged father, is the man
    We ought to make a friend.

    THE.                      His native realm
    Produces an illustrious progeny.

    HER. Turn me around, that I may see my sons.

    THE. Hoping such philtre may thy griefs appease.

    HER. This earnestly I wish for, and would clasp
    My father to this bosom.

    AMP.                    Here, lo, here!
    For what my son desires, to me is grateful.

    THE. Of all the labours thou didst erst achieve,
    Hast thou thus lost the memory?

    HER.                            All those ills
    Were less severe than what I now experience.

    THE. Should any one behold thee grown unmanly,
    He could not praise thee.

    HER.                      Though to you I seem
    Degraded to an abject life, I trust
    That I my former courage shall resume.

    THE. Where now is the illustrious Hercules?

    HER. What had you been, if still you in the shades
    Had miserably dwelt?

    THE.                Then sunk my courage
    Beneath the meanest of the human race.

    HER. Why then persist in saying that my woes
    Have quite subdued me?

    THE.                  Onward!

    HER.                          Good old man,
    Farewell.

    AMP.      Farewell too, O my son.

    HER.                              My children
    Inter as I directed.

    AMP.                O, my son,
    But who will bury me?

    HER.                  I.

    AMP.                    When will you
    Come hither?

    HER.        After thou hast for my children
    Performed that pious office.

    AMP.                        How?

    HER.                              I’ll fetch thee
    From Thebes to Athens.—Bear into the palace
    My children’s corses which pollute the ground.
    But as for me, who have disgraced and plunged
    My house in ruin, I will follow Theseus,
    Towed like a battered skiff. Whoe’er prefers
    Wealth or dominion to a steadfast friend,
    Judges amiss.

    CHOR.        Most wretched, drowned in tears,
    Reft of our great protector, we depart.




THE CHILDREN OF HERCULES.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    IOLAUS.
    COPREUS.
    CHORUS OF ATHENIAN OLD MEN.
    DEMOPHOON.
    MACARIA.
    ALCMENA.
    MESSENGER.
    EURYSTHEUS.


SCENE.—BEFORE THE ALTAR OF JUPITER, IN THE FORUM AT MARATHON, A CITY IN
THE ATHENIAN DOMINIONS.

IOLAUS.

    Long have I held this sentiment: the just
    Are born the streams of bounty to diffuse
    On all around them; while the man whose soul
    Is warped by interest, useless in the State,
    Untractable and harsh to every friend,
    Lives only for himself; in words alone
    This doctrine I imbibed not. Through a sense
    Of virtuous shame and reverence for my kindred
    When I in peace at Argos might have dwelt,
    I singly shared the toils of Hercules,
    While he on earth remained; but now he dwells
    In heaven, I guard his children, though protection
    Be what I need myself. For when their sire
    Forsook this nether world, Eurystheus strove
    Immediately to slay us; but I ’scaped
    From that oppressor’s fangs, and though to me
    Lost is my country, I have saved my life.
    But we poor vagabonds, from city fly
    To some fresh city, ever forced to change
    Our dwelling; for Eurystheus deems it meet
    To add this wrong to former wrongs, he sends
    His heralds wheresoe’er he hears we settle,
    And claims and drives us forth from every land;
    No slight resentment from the Argive realm
    Against our friends denouncing, he reminds them
    Of his own prosperous fortunes; when they see
    My weakness, and these little ones bereft
    Of their great father, to superior might
    They crouch, and force the suppliant to depart.
    But with the exiled race of Hercules
    A voluntary exile, I partake
    Their evil fortunes, steadfastly resolved
    Not to betray them; by malignant tongues
    It never shall be said, “Oh, mark these orphans!
    Since their sire’s death their kinsman Iolaus
    Protects them not.” But, exiled from all Greece,
    On reaching Marathon and the domain
    Subject to the same rulers, here we sit
    Before the altars of the gods, and sue
    For their assistance. In this region dwell
    Two sons of Theseus, I am told, by lot
    Who portion out this realm, they from Pandion
    Descend, and to these children are allied.
    We therefore undertook our present journey
    To the Athenian realm; two aged guides
    Conduct the hapless wanderers; my attention
    Is to the boys devoted; but Alcmena,
    Entering the adjacent temple, in her arms
    Tenderly clasps the female progeny
    Of her departed son. Amid the crowd
    We fear to introduce these tender virgins,
    Or place them at the altars of the gods.
    But Hyllus and his brothers, more mature
    In years, inquire in what far distant land
    A fortress for our future residence
    We yet can find, if we from these domains
    By force should be expelled. My sons, come hither,
    Cling to this garment; for to us I see
    Eurystheus’ herald coming, by whose hate,
    We wanderers, banished from each friendly realm,
    Are still pursued. Thou, execrable miscreant,
    Perish thyself, and perish he who sent thee:
    For to the noble father of these children
    Oft hath that tongue enjoined severest toils.

COPREUS, IOLAUS.

    COP. What, think’st thou unmolested to enjoy
    This pleasant seat, and have thy vagrant steps
    Entered at length a city prompt to fight
    Thy battles? for the man who will prefer
    Thy feeble arm to that of great Eurystheus,
    Exists not. Hence! why in these useless toils
    Dost thou persist? thou must return to Argos
    Where they have doomed thee to be stoned.

    IOL.                                  Not thus:
    For in this altar shall I find protection,
    And this free country on whose soil we tread.

    COP. Wilt thou constrain me then to have recourse
    To violence?

    IOL.        With forceful hand, nor me
    Nor these poor children shalt thou hence expel.

    COP. Ere long shalt thou perceive that thou hast uttered
    Erroneous prophesies.

    IOL.                  This ne’er shall be
    Long as I live.

    COP.            Depart, for I will seize them
    ’Gainst thy consent, and to Eurystheus’ power
    Surrender up, for they to him belong.

    IOL. Aid me, ye ancient citizens of Athens,
    For we, though suppliants, forcibly are torn
    E’en from Jove’s public altar, and the wreaths
    Twined round our sacred branches are polluted;
    Shame to your city, insult to the gods.

CHORUS, IOLAUS, COPREUS.

    CHOR. What clamorous voices from yon altars rise?
    What mischiefs are impending?

    IOL.                          See a man
    Burdened with age, wretch that I am! lie prostrate.

    CHOR. Who threw thee down? what execrable hand——

    IOL. ’Tis he, O stranger, he who to your gods
    Yielding no reverence, strives with impious force
    E’en now, to drag me from this hallowed seat
    Before Jove’s altar.

    CHOR.                He! But from what land
    Cam’st thou, old man, to this confederate state
    Formed of four cities? From the distant coast
    Of steep Eubœa did ye ply your oars?

    IOL. The life I lead, O stranger, is not that
    Of vagrant islanders; but in your realm
    From famed Mycene’s bulwarks I arrive.

    CHOR. Among thy countrymen, old man, what name
    Thou bear’st, inform me.

    IOL.                    Ye perchance knew somewhat
    Of Iolaus, great Alcides’ comrade,
    A name not quite unnoticed by renown.

    CHOR. I formerly have heard of him: but say
    Who is the father of that infant race,
    Whom with thy arm thou guid’st?

    IOL.                            These are the sons
    Of Hercules, O strangers, they, to you,
    And to your city, humble suppliants come.

    CHOR. On what account, inform me; to demand
    An audience of the state?

    IOL.                      That to their foes
    They may not be surrendered up, nor torn
    Forcibly from the altars of your gods,
    And carried back to Argos.

    COP.                      But thy lords
    Who bear rule over thee, and hither trace
    Thy steps, will ne’er be satisfied with this.

    CHOR. O stranger, ’tis our duty to revere
    The suppliants of the gods: with forceful hand
    Shall no man drag thee from this holy spot,
    This seat of the immortal powers; dread justice
    Shall guard thee from the wrong.

    COP.                            Out of your land
    The vagrant subjects of Eurystheus drive,
    As I admonish; and this hand shall use
    No violence.

    CHOR.        How impious is that city
    Which disregards the helpless stranger’s prayer!

    COP. ’Twere best to interfere not in these broils,
    And to adopt some more expedient counsels.

    CHOR. You, therefore, to the monarch of this realm
    Should have declared your errand, ere thus far
    You had proceeded: but with brutal force
    These strangers from the altars of the gods
    Presume not to convey, and to this land
    Of freedom yield due reverence.

    COP.                            But what king
    Rules this domain and city?

    CHOR.                      Theseus’ son,
    Renowned Demophoon.

    COP.                Better I with him
    This contest could decide: for all I yet
    Have spoken, is but a mere waste of words.

    CHOR. Behold, he hither comes in haste, and with him,
    To hear this cause, his brother Acamas.

DEMOPHOON, IOLAUS, COPREUS, CHORUS.

    DEM. Since by thy speed, old man, thou hast outstripped
    Thy juniors, and already reached the shrine
    Of Jove, inform me what event hath caused
    This multitude t’ assemble.

    CHOR.                      There the sons
    Of Hercules in suppliant posture sit,
    And with their wreaths, as you behold, O king,
    Adorn the altar; that is Iolaus,
    The faithful comrade of their valiant sire.

    DEM. How needed their distress these clamorous shrieks?

    CHOR. [_turning towards_ COPREUS.]
    He raised the uproar, when by force he strove
    To bear them hence, and on his knees, to earth
    Threw the old man, till I for pity wept.

    DEM. Although he in the habit which he wears
    Adopts the mode of Greece, such deeds as these
    Speak the barbarian. But without delay
    On thee it is incumbent now to tell me
    The country whence thou cam’st.

    COP.                            I am an Argive;
    Thus far to solve your question: but from whence
    I come, and on what errand, will I add;
    Mycene’s king, Eurystheus, sends me hither
    To fetch these vagrants home: yet I, O stranger,
    Will with abundant justice, in my actions,
    As well as words, proceed; myself an Argive,
    I bear away these Argives, I but seize
    The fugitives who from my native land
    Escaped, when by the laws which there prevail
    They were ordained to bleed. We have a right,
    Because we are the rulers of the city,
    To execute the sentence we enact
    ’Gainst our own subjects. To the sacred hearths
    Of many other states when they repaired,
    We urged the self-same reasons, and none ventured
    To be the authors of their own destruction.
    But haply they in you may have perceived
    A foolish tenderness, and hither come,
    Desperate themselves, you also to involve
    In the same perils, whether they succeed
    Or fail in the emprise: for they no hope
    Can cherish, while you yet retain your reason,
    That you alone, in all the wide extent
    Of Greece, whose various regions they have traversed,
    Should pity those calamities which rise
    But from their own imprudence. Now compare
    Th’ alternative proposed; by sheltering them
    In these dominions, or allowing us
    To bear them hence, what gain may you expect?
    Side but with us, these benefits are yours:
    Eurystheus’ self, and Argos’ numerous troops,
    Will aid this city with their utmost might;
    But if, by their seducing language moved,
    Ye harbour groundless pity for their woes,
    Arms must decide the strife. Nor vainly think
    We will desist till we have fully tried
    The temper of our swords. But what excuse
    Have ye to plead? Of what domains bereft
    Are ye provoked to wage a desperate war
    With the Tirynthian Argives? What allies
    Will aid you? What pretext can ye allege
    To claim funereal honours for the slain?
    The curses of your city will await
    Such conduct; for the sake of that old man,
    Whom I may justly call a tomb, a shadow,
    And those unfriended children, should you step
    Into the yawning gulf. Suppose the best
    Which possibly can happen, that a prospect
    Of future good hence rises; distant hopes
    Fall short of present gain. In riper years
    Ill can these youths be qualified to fight
    Against the Argive host (if this elate
    Your soul with hope), and ere that wished event
    There is a length of intermediate time
    In which ye may be ruined; but comply
    With my advice; on me no gift bestow,
    Let me but take what to ourselves belongs,
    Mycene shall be yours. But oh, forbear
    To act as ye are wont, nor form a league
    With those of no account, when mightier friends
    May be procured.

    DEM.            Who can decide a cause
    Or ascertain its merits till he hear
    Both sides distinctly?

    IOL.                  In your land, O king,
    This great advantage, freedom of reply
    To the malignant charge against me urged,
    I find, and no man, as from other cities,
    Shall drive me hence. But we have nothing left
    For which it now behoves us to contend
    With him, nor aught, since that decree hath passed,
    To do with Argos; from our native land
    We are cast forth. In this distressful state,
    How can he drag us back again with justice
    As subjects of Mycene, to that realm
    Which hath already banished us? We there
    Are only foreigners. But why should he
    Whom Argos dooms to exile, by all Greece
    Be also exiled? Not by Athens sure;
    For ne’er will Athens from its blest domains
    Expel the race of Hercules, appalled
    By Argos’ menaced wrath. For neither Trachis,
    Nor is that city of Achaia here,
    Whence thou by boasting of the might of Argos
    In words like those which thou hast uttered now,
    These suppliants didst unjustly drive away
    Though seated at the altars. If thy threats
    Here too prevail, no longer shall we find
    Freedom, not e’en in Athens; but I know
    Full well the generous temper of its sons,
    And rather would they die. For to the brave
    Shame is a load which renders life most hateful.
    Enough of Athens—for immoderate praise
    Becomes invidious; I remember too
    How oft I have been heretofore distressed
    By overstrained encomiums. But on you
    How greatly ’tis incumbent to protect
    These children will I show, since o’er this land
    You rule; for Pittheus was the son of Pelops,
    From Pittheus Æthra sprung, from Æthra Theseus
    Your father; from your ancestors to those
    Of your unhappy suppliants I proceed;
    Alcides was the son of thundering Jove
    And of Alcmena; from Lysidice,
    Daughter of Pelops, did Alcmena spring,
    One common grandsire gave your grandame birth,
    And theirs; so near in blood are you to them;
    But, O Demophoon, what beyond the ties
    Of family you to these children owe
    Will I inform you, and relate how erst
    With Theseus in one bark I sailed, and bore
    Their father’s shield, when we that belt, the cause
    Of dreadful slaughter, sought; and from the caves
    Of Pluto, Hercules led back your sire.
    This truth all Greece attests. They in return
    From you implore this boon, that to their foes
    They may not be surrendered up, nor torn
    By force from these your tutelary gods,
    And banished from this realm. For to yourself
    ’Twere infamous and baneful to your city
    Should suppliants, exiles, sprung from ancestors
    The same with yours (ah, miserable me!
    Behold, behold them!) with a forceful arm
    Be dragged away. But to your hands, and beard,
    Lifting these hallowed branches, I entreat you
    Slight not Alcides’ children, undertake
    Their cause; and, oh, to them become a kinsman,
    Become a friend, a father, brother, lord,
    For better were it to admit these claims,
    Than suffer them to fall beneath the rage
    Of Argive tyrants.

    CHOR.              I with pity heard
    Their woes, O king, but now I clearly see
    How noble birth to adverse fortune yields;
    For though they spring from an illustrious sire,
    Yet meet they with afflictions they deserve not.

    DEM. Three powerful motives urge me, while I view
    The misery which attends you, not to spurn
    These strangers; first dread Jove, before whose altars
    You with these children sit; next kindred ties,
    And services performed in ancient days,
    Give them a claim to such relief from me
    As from their godlike father mine obtained;
    And last of all that infamy which most
    I ought to loathe; for if I should permit
    A foreigner this altar to despoil,
    I in a land of freedom shall no longer
    Appear to dwell, but to surrender up,
    Through fear, the suppliants to their Argive lords,
    In this extreme of danger. Would to heaven
    You had arrived with happier auspices;
    But tremble not lest any brutal hand
    Should from this hallowed altar force away
    You and the children. Therefore go thou back
    To Argos, and this message to Eurystheus
    Deliver; tell him too if there be aught
    Which ’gainst our guests he can allege, the laws
    Are open; but thou shalt not drag them hence.

    COP. Not if I prove that it is just, and bring
    Prevailing reasons?

    DEM.                How can it be just
    To drive away the suppliant?

    COP.                        Hence no shame
    Shall light on me, but ruin on your head.

    DEM. Should I permit thee to convey them hence
    In me ’twere base indeed.

    COP.                      Let them be banished
    From your domains, and I elsewhere will seize them.

    DEM. Thou fool, who deem’st thyself more wise than
    Jove!

    COP. All villains may, it seems, take refuge here.

    DEM. This altar of the gods, to all affords
    A sure asylum.

    COP.          In a different light,
    This to Mycene’s rulers will appear.

    DEM. Am not I then the monarch of this realm?

    COP. Offer no wrong to them, if you are wise.

    DEM. Do ye then suffer wrong when I refuse
    To violate the temples of the gods?

    COP. I would not have you enter on a war
    Against the Argives.

    DEM.                Equally inclined
    Am I to peace, yet will not I yield up
    These suppliants.

    COP.              Hence am I resolved to drag
    Those who belong to me.

    DEM.                    Thou then to Argos
    Shalt not with ease return.

    COP.                        Soon will I make
    Th’ experiment and know.

    DEM.                    If thou presume
    To touch them, thou immediately shalt rue it.

    COP. I by the gods conjure you not to strike
    A herald.

    DEM.      Strike I will, unless that herald
    Learn to behave discreetly.

    CHOR.                      Go. And you,
    O king, forbear to touch him.

    COP.                          I retire:
    For weak in combat is a single arm.
    But I again shall hither come, and bring
    A host of Argives armed with brazen spears:
    Unnumbered warriors wait for my return.
    The king himself, Eurystheus, is their chief;
    He on the borders of Alcathous’ realm
    Waits for an answer. He in glittering mail,
    Soon as he hears your arrogant reply,
    To you, your subjects, this devoted realm,
    And all its wasted forests will appear,
    For we in vain at Argos should possess
    A band so numerous of heroic youths,
    If we chastised not your assuming pride.

                                            [_Exit_ COPREUS.

    DEM. Away, detested miscreant; for I fear not
    Thy Argos: and thou ne’er, by dragging hence
    These suppliants, shalt disgrace me: for this city
    As an appendage to the Argive realm
    I hold not, but its freedom will maintain.

    CHOR. ’Tis time each sage precaution to exert,
    Ere to the confines of this land advance
    The troops of Argos: for Mycene’s wrath
    Is terrible in combat, and more fierce
    Than heretofore will they invade us now.
    For to exaggerate facts beyond the truth
    Is every herald’s custom. To his king,
    How many specious tales do you suppose
    Of the atrocious insults he endured,
    He will relate, and add how he the loss
    Of life endangered?

    IOL.                To the sons devolve
    No honours which exceed the being born
    Of an illustrious and heroic sire,
    And wedding into virtuous families.
    But on that man no praise will I bestow,
    Who by his lusts impelled, among the wicked
    A nuptial union forms; hence to his sons
    Disgrace, instead of pleasure, he bequeaths.
    For noble birth repels adversity
    Better than abject parentage. When sinking
    Under the utmost pressure of our woes,
    We find these friends and kinsmen, who alone
    Amid the populous extent of Greece
    Stand forth in our behalf. Ye generous youths,
    Now give them your right hands, and in return
    Take those of your protectors: O my sons,
    Draw near: we have made trial of our friends.
    If ye again behold your native walls,
    Possess the self-same mansions, and the honours
    Which your illustrious father erst enjoyed;
    These deem your saviours and your friends, nor wield
    Against their fostering land the hostile spear.
    On your remembrance let these benefits
    Be ever stamped, and hold this city dear;
    For they deserve your reverence, who from us
    Repel so great a nation, such a swarm
    Of fierce Pelasgian troops: and, though they see
    Our poverty and exile, have refused
    To yield us up, or banish from their realm.
    Both while I live, and after the cold grave
    Receives me at the destined hour, my friend,
    I with loud voice your merits will applaud,
    Approaching mighty Theseus, and my words
    Shall soothe your father’s ear when I recount
    With what humanity you have received us,
    And how protected the defenceless sons
    Of Hercules: by your illustrious birth
    Distinguished, you the glories of your sire
    Through Greece maintain: sprung from a noble lineage
    Yet are you one among that chosen few
    Who in no instance deviate from the virtues
    Of your great ancestry: although ’mid thousands
    Scarce is a single instance to be found
    Of those who emulate their father’s worth.

    CHOR. This country, in a just and honest cause,
    Is ever prompt to succour the distressed.
    Hence in its friends’ behalf hath it sustained
    Unnumbered toils, and now another conflict
    I see impending.

    DEM.            Rightly hast thou spoken,
    And in such toils I feel a conscious pride.
    These benefits shall never be forgotten;
    But an assembly of the citizens
    I instantly will summon, and arrange
    A numerous squadron, to receive the onset
    Of fierce Mycene’s host, first sending spies
    To meet them, lest they unawares assail us.
    For the bold warrior, who without delay
    Goes forth to battle, keeps the foe aloof.
    I also will collect the seers, and slay
    The victims; but do you, old man, meanwhile
    Enter the palace with these children, leaving
    Jove’s altar: for my menial train are there,
    Who will with fond solicitude attend you,
    Although I am not present: but go in.

    IOL. I will not leave the altar; on this seat
    We supplicants will remain, and pray to Jove,
    That prosperous fortunes may attend your city.
    But when you from this conflict are with glory
    Released, we to your palace will repair;
    Nor are the gods, who war on our behalf,
    O king, inferior to the gods of Argos.
    For o’er that city, Jove’s majestic consort,
    Juno, but here Minerva doth preside.
    This I maintain, that nought ensures success
    Beyond the aid of mightier deities,
    Nor will imperial Pallas be subdued.

                                          [_Exit_ DEMOPHOON.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

          Boast as thou wilt, and urge thy proud demand,
              This nation disregards thy ire,
              Thou stranger from the Argive land.
              Nor can thy sounding words control
              The steadfast purpose of my soul:
              Great Athens, by her lovely choir
              Distinguished, shall unstained preserve
          Her ancient glory, nor from virtue swerve;
          But thou, devoid of wisdom, dost obey
        The son of Sthenelus, the tyrant’s impious sway,

    II.

          Who com’st amidst an independent state,
              In nought inferior to the strength
              Of Argos, and with brutal hate
              Dar’st, though a foreigner, to seize
              The exiles, who our deities
              Implore, and in these realms at length
              From their distress obtain a shield:
          Thou e’en to sceptred monarchs will not yield,
          Yet no just plea thy subtle tongue hath found.
        How can such conduct warp the man whose judgment’s sound?

    III.

          Peace is the object of my dear delight:
              But thou, O tyrant, thou whose breast
          Well may I deem by frenzy is possest,
          If ’gainst this city thou exert thy might,
          Pant’st after trophies which thou ne’er shalt gain.
              Bearing targe and brazen lance
              Others with equal arms advance.
          O thou, who fondly seek’st th’ embattled plain,
              Shake not these turrets, spare the haunt
        Of every gentle grace.—Thou wretch, avaunt.

DEMOPHOON, IOLAUS, CHORUS.

    IOL. Why com’st thou hither, O my son, with eyes
    Expressive of affliction? from the foe
    What recent information canst thou give?
    Do they delay their march, are they at hand,
    Or bring’st thou any tidings? for the threats
    That herald uttered sure will be accomplished.
    Blest in the favour of the gods, the tyrant
    Exults, I know, and arrogantly deems
    That he o’er Athens shall prevail; but Jove
    Chastises the presumptuous.

    DEM.                        Argos comes
    With numerous squadrons, and its king Eurystheus,
    Myself beheld him. It behoves the man
    Who claims the merit of an able chief,
    Not to depend upon his spies alone
    To mark the foe’s approach. But with his host
    He hath not yet invaded these domains,
    But halting on yon mountain’s topmost ridge
    Observes (I from conjecture speak) the road
    By which he may lead forth his troops to battle,
    And where he in this realm with greatest safety
    May station them. Already have I made
    Each preparation to repel their onset.
    The city is in arms, the victims stand
    Before the altars, with their blood t’ appease
    The wrath of every god, and due lustrations
    Are sprinkled by the seers, that o’er our foes
    We may obtain a triumph, and preserve
    This country. Every prophet who expounds
    The oracles, convening, have I searched
    Into each sage response of ancient times,
    Or public or concealed, on which depends
    The welfare of the realm. In all beside
    Differ Heaven’s mandates: but one dread behest
    Runs through the several auspices, to Ceres
    They bid me sacrifice some blooming maid
    Who from a nobler sire derives her birth.
    Zeal have I shown abundant in your cause,
    But will not slay my daughter, nor constrain
    Any Athenian citizen to make
    Such an abhorred oblation: for the man
    Exists not, who is so devoid of reason,
    As willingly to yield his children up
    With his own hands. But what afflicts me most
    Is this: tumultuous crowds appear; some cry,
    ’Tis just that we the foreign suppliants aid,
    But others blame my folly. If no means
    Can be devised to satisfy them all,
    Soon will a storm of civil war arise.
    See thou to this, and think of some expedient,
    How ye and how this country may be saved,
    Without the citizens’ calumnious tongues
    My fame assailing. For I rule not here
    With boundless power, like a barbarian king;
    Let but my deeds be just, and in return
    Shall I experience justice.

    CHOR.                      Will not Jove
    Suffer this city to exert its courage,
    And aid these hapless strangers as we wish?

    IOL. Our situation, O my sons, resembles
    That of the mariners, who having ’scaped
    The storm’s relentless fury, when in sight
    Of land, are from the coast by adverse winds
    Driven back into the deep. Thus from this realm
    Just as we reach the shore, like shipwrecked men,
    Are we expelled. O inauspicious Hope,
    Why didst thou soothe me with ideal joy,
    Although it was ordained that thou should’st leave
    Thy favours incomplete? The king deserves
    At least to be excused, if he consent not
    To slay his subjects’ daughters; to this city
    My praise is due, and if the gods would place me
    In the same prosperous fortunes, from my soul
    Your benefits should never be effaced.
    But now, alas! no counsel can I give
    To you, my children. Whither shall we turn?
    What god have we neglected? To what land
    Have we not fled for shelter? We must perish,
    We shall be yielded up. My being doomed
    To die, I heed but for this cause alone,
    That by my death I shall afford delight
    To our perfidious foes. But, O my sons.
    For you I weep, I pity you, I pity
    Alcmena, aged mother of your sire,
    Oh, most unhappy in a life too long!
    I too am wretched, who unnumbered toils
    Have fruitlessly endured; it was ordained,
    It was ordained, alas! that we should fall
    Into the hands of our relentless foes,
    And meet a shameful, miserable death.
    Know you, what still remains for you to do,
    On my behalf? For all my hopes of saving
    The children are not vanished. In their stead
    Me to the Argive host surrender up,
    O king, and rush not into needless danger,
    Yet save these children. To retain a love
    Of life becomes me not; I yield it up
    Without regret. It is Eurystheus’ wish
    The rather to seize me, and to expose
    To infamy, because I was the comrade
    Of Hercules; for frenzy hath possessed
    His soul. The wise man, e’en in those he hates,
    Had rather find discretion than a want
    Of understanding; for a foe endued
    With sense will pay due reverence to the vanquished.

    CHOR. Forbear, old man, thus hastily to blame
    This city; for to us though it might prove
    More advantageous, yet to our disgrace
    Would it redound, should we betray our guests.

    DEM. A generous, but impracticable, scheme
    Is that thou hast proposed: for Argos’ king
    In quest of thee no squadrons hither leads.
    What profit to Eurystheus from the death
    Of one so old as thou art could arise?
    He wants to murder _these_: for to their foes
    The rising blossoms of a noble race,
    To whom the memory of their father’s wrongs
    Is present, must be dreadful: for all this
    He cannot but foresee. But if thou know
    Of any other counsel more expedient,
    Adopt it; for my soul hath been perplexed,
    Since that oracular response I heard
    Which fills me with unwelcome apprehensions.

                                          [_Exit_ DEMOPHOON.

MACARIA, IOLAUS, CHORUS.

    MAC. Deem not that I, O strangers, am too bold
    Because I from my chamber venture forth;
    This is my first request: for silence, joined
    With modesty and a domestic life,
    Is woman’s best accomplishment. I heard
    Your groans, O Iolaus, and advanced
    Though not appointed by our house to act
    As their ambassadress; in some degree
    Yet am I qualified for such an office,
    I have so great an interest in the weal
    Of these my brothers; on my own account
    I also wish to hear if any ill,
    Added to those you have already suffered,
    Torture your soul.

    IOL.              Not now for the first time,
    On thee, O daughter, most of all the children
    Of Hercules my praise can I bestow:
    But our ill-fated house, just as it seemed
    Emerging from its past disgraces, sinks
    Afresh into inextricable ruin.
    The king informs us, that the seers, whose voice
    Expounds the will of heaven, have signified
    No bull nor heifer, but some blooming maid
    Who from a noble sire derives her birth,
    Must be the victim, if we would redeem
    The city and ourselves from utter ruin;
    Here then are we perplexed: for his own children
    He says he will not sacrifice, nor those
    Of any of his subjects. Though to me
    Indeed he speaks not plainly, in some sort
    He intimates, that if we by no means
    Can extricate ourselves from these distresses,
    We must find out some other land to flee to,
    For he this realm would from destruction save.

    MAC. May we indulge the hope of our escape
    Upon these terms?

    IOL.              These only: in all else
    With prosperous fortunes crowned.

    MAC.                              No longer dread
    The spear of Argos, for myself, old man,
    Am ready, ere they doom me to be slain,
    And here stand forth a voluntary victim.
    For what could we allege on our behalf,
    If Athens condescend to undergo
    Dangers so great, while we who have imposed
    These toils on others, though within our reach
    Lie all the means of being saved, yet shrink
    From death? Not thus: we should provoke the laugh
    Of universal scorn, if, with loud groans,
    We suppliants, at the altars of the gods,
    Should take our seats, and prove devoid of courage,
    From that illustrious father though we spring.
    How can the virtuous reconcile such conduct?
    This to our glory would forsooth redound
    (O may it never happen!) when this city
    Is taken, should we fall into the hands
    Of our triumphant foes, when after all
    Some noble maid reluctant must be dragged
    To Pluto’s loathed embrace. But from these realms
    Cast forth, should I become an abject vagrant,
    Must I not blush when any one inquires,
    “Why came ye hither with your suppliant branches
    Too fond of life? Retreat from these domains,
    For we no aid to cowards will afford.”
    But if when these are dead, my single life
    Be saved, I cannot entertain a hope
    That I shall e’er be happy: through this motive
    Have caused full many to betray their friends.
    For who with a deserted maid will join,
    Or in the bonds of wedlock, or desire
    That I to him a race of sons should bear?
    I therefore hold it better far to die,
    Than to endure, without deserving them,
    Such foul indignities, as can seem light
    To her alone, who, from a noble race
    Like mine, descends not: to the scene of death
    Conduct, with garlands crown me, and prepare
    If ye think fit, th’ initiatory rites;
    Ye hence the foe shall conquer: for this soul
    Shrinks not with mean reluctance. I engage
    For these my brothers, and myself, to bleed
    A willing victim; for with ease detached
    From life, I have imbibed this best of lessons,
    To die with firmness in a glorious cause.

    CHOR. Alas! what language shall I find, t’ express
    My admiration of the lofty speech
    I from this virgin hear, who for her brothers
    Resolves to die? What tongue can utter words
    More truly generous; or what man surpass
    Such deeds as these?

    IOL.                Thou art no spurious child,
    But from the godlike seed of Hercules,
    O daughter, dost indeed derive thy birth.
    Although thy words are such as cannot shame,
    Thy fate afflicts me. Yet will I propose
    What may with greater justice be performed.
    Together call the sisters of this maid,
    And to atone for the whole race, let her
    On whom th’ impartial lot shall fall, be slain;
    But without such decision ’tis not just
    That thou should’st die.

    MAC.                    I will not die as chance
    The lot dispenses; for I hence should forfeit
    All merit: name not such a scheme, old man.
    If me ye will accept, and of my zeal
    Avail yourselves, I gladly yield up life
    Upon these terms, but stoop not to constraint.

    IOL. The speech thou now hast uttered soars beyond
    What thou at first didst say, though that was noble:
    But thou thy former courage dost surpass
    By this fresh instance of exalted courage,
    The merit of thy former words, by words
    More meritorious. Daughter, I command not,
    Nor yet oppose thy death: for thou by dying
    Wilt serve thy brothers.

    MAC.                    You in cautious terms
    Command me: fear not, lest on my account
    You should contract pollution: for to die
    Is my free choice. But follow me, old man,
    For in your arms would I expire: attend,
    And o’er my body cast the decent veil:
    To dreadful slaughter dauntless I go forth,
    Because I from that father spring, whose name
    With pride I utter.

    IOL.                At the hour of death
    I cannot stand beside thee.

    MAC.                        Grant but this,
    That when I breathe my last, I may be tended
    By women, not by men.

    IOL.                  It shall be thus,
    O miserable virgin: for in me
    ’Twere base, if I neglected any rite
    That decency enjoins, for many reasons;
    Because thy soul is great, because ’tis just,
    And of all women I have ever seen,
    Because thou art most wretched. But from these
    And from thy aged kinsman, if thou wish
    For aught, to me thy last behests address.

    MAC. Adieu, my venerable friend, adieu!
    Instruct these boys in every branch of wisdom,
    And make them like yourself, they can attain
    No higher pitch; strive to protect them still,
    And for their sake that valued life prolong;
    Your children we, to you our nurture owe.
    Me you behold, mature for bridal joys,
    Dying to save them. But may ye, my band
    Of brothers who are here, be blest, and gain
    All those advantages, which to procure
    For you, the falchion shall transpierce my breast.
    Revere this good old man, revere Alcmena
    Your father’s aged mother, and these strangers.
    Should ye be ever rescued from your woes,
    Should gracious Heaven permit you to revisit
    Your native land, forget not to inter,
    With such magnificence as I deserve,
    Your benefactress, for I have not proved
    Deficient in attention to your welfare,
    But die to save our family. To me
    These monumental honours shall suffice
    Instead of children, or the virgin state,
    If there be aught amid the realms beneath,
    But ’tis my wish there may not: for if grief
    On us frail mortals also there attend,
    I know not whither any one can turn:
    For by the wise hath death been ever deemed
    The most effectual cure for every ill.

    IOL. O thou, distinguished by thy lofty soul,
    Be well assured thy glory shall outshine
    That of all other women; both in life
    And death, shalt thou be honoured by thy friends.
    But ah, farewell! for with ill-omened words
    I tremble lest we should provoke the goddess,
    Dread Proserpine, to whom thou now art sacred.

                                            [_Exit_ MACARIA.

    My sons I perish: grief unnerves my frame;
    Support and place me in the hallowed seat:
    And, O my dearest children, o’er my face
    Extend this garment: for I am not pleased
    With what is done: yet, had not Heaven’s response
    Found this completion, we must all have died;
    For we must then have suffered greater ills
    Than these, which are already most severe.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

        In just proportion, as the gods ordain,
            Is bliss diffused through life’s short span,
            Or sorrow portioned out to man:
            No favoured house can still maintain
            From age to age its prosperous state,
        For swift are the vicissitudes of fate,
            Who now assails pride’s towering crest,
            Now makes the drooping exile blest.
            From destiny we cannot fly;
            No wisdom can her shafts repel;
        But he who vainly dares her power defy
            Compassed with endless toils shall dwell.
            Ask not from Heaven with impious prayer,
            Blessings it cannot grant to man,
            Nor waste in misery life’s short span
            O’erwhelmed by querulous despair.
        The nymph goes forth to meet a noble death,
            Her brothers and this land to save,
            And fame, with tributary breath
            Shall sound her praises in the grave.
            For dauntless virtue finds a way
        Through labours which her progress would delay.
            Such deeds as these, her father grace,
            And add fresh splendour to her race,
        But if with reverential awe thou shed
            Over the virtuous dead
        A tear of pity, in that tear I’ll join,
            Inspired with sentiments like thine.

SERVANT, IOLAUS, CHORUS.

    SER. Ye children, hail! but where is Iolaus,
    That aged man; and hath your grandame left
    Her seat before the altar?

    IOL.                      Here am I,
    If aught my presence can avail.

    SER.                            On earth
    Why art thou stretched, what means that downcast look?

    IOL. Domestic cares have harrowed up my soul.

    SER. Lift up thy head, arise.

    IOL.                          I am grown old,
    And all my strength is vanished.

    SER.                            But to thee
    I bring most joyful tidings.

    IOL.                        Who art thou?
    Where have I seen thee? I remember not.

    SER. Hyllus’ attendant, canst thou not distinguish
    These features?

    IOL.            O my friend, art thou arrived
    To snatch me from despair?

    SER.                      Most certainly:
    Moreover the intelligence I bring
    Will make thee happy.

    IOL.                  Thee I call, come forth,
    Alcmena, mother of a noble son,
    And listen to these acceptable tidings:
    Full long thy soul, for those who now approach,
    Was torn with grief, lest they should ne’er return.

ALCMENA, SERVANT, IOLAUS, CHORUS.

    ALC. Whence with your voice resounds this echoing dome,
    O Iolaus, is another herald
    From Argos come, who forcibly assails you?
    My strength indeed is small, yet be assured
    Of this, presumptuous stranger, while I live
    Thou shalt not bear them hence. May I no more
    Be deemed the mother of that godlike son,
    When I submit to this. But if thou dare
    To touch the children, with two aged foes
    Ignobly wilt thou strive.

    IOL.                      Be of good cheer,
    Thou hoary matron, banish these alarms;
    No herald with a hostile message comes
    From Argos.

    ALC.        Why then raised you that loud voice,
    The harbinger of fear?

    IOL.                  That from the temple
    Thou might’st come forth, and join us.

    ALC.                                What you mean
    I comprehend not. Who is this?

    IOL.                          He tells us
    Thy grandson marches hither.

    ALC.                        Hail, O thou
    Who bear’st these welcome tidings? but what brings him
    To these domains? Where is he? What affairs
    Prevented him from coming hither with thee,
    To fill my soul with transport?

    SER.                            He now marshals
    The forces which attend him.

    ALC.                        In this conference
    Am I no longer then allowed to join?

    IOL. Thou art: but ’tis my business to inquire
    Into these matters.

    SER.                Which of his transactions
    Say art thou most solicitous to know?

    IOL. The number of the troops he leads?

    SER.                                    Is great,
    I cannot count them.

    IOL.                The Athenian chiefs
    Are sure apprized of this.

    SER.                      They are apprized,
    And the left wing is formed.

    IOL.                        Then the whole host
    Arrayed in arms is ready for the battle.

    SER. The victims to a distance from the ranks
    Already are removed.

    IOL.                But at what distance
    Is the encampment of the Argive warriors?

    SER. So near that we their leader can distinguish.

    IOL. What is he doing; marshalling our foes?

    SER. This we conjecture: for I could not hear
    His voice: but I must go; for I my lord
    Will not abandon when he nobly braves
    The dangers of the field.

    IOL.                      I too with thee
    Will join him; for the same are our intentions,
    As honour bids us, to assist our friends.

    SER. Unwisely hast thou spoken.

    IOL.                            With my friends
    Shall not I then the stubborn conflict share?

    SER. That strength which erst was thine is now no more.

    IOL. Can I not pierce their shields?

    SER.                            Thou may’st: but first,
    More likely, fall thyself.

    IOL.                      No foe will dare
    To meet me face to face.

    SER.                    By thy mere looks,
    With that debilitated arm, no wound
    Canst thou inflict.

    IOL.                My presence in the field
    Will to our troops give courage, and augment
    Their number.

    SER.          Of small service to thy friends
    Will thy appearance prove.

    IOL.                      Detain me not:
    I for some glorious action am prepared.

    SER. Thou hast the will to act, but not the power.

    IOL. I will not be reproached for loitering here,
    Say what thou wilt beside.

    SER.                      But without arms
    How wilt thou face yon warriors sheathed in mail?

    IOL. The various implements of war are lodged
    Beneath these roofs; with freedom will I use,
    And if I live, return them; if I die,
    The god will not demand them back again.
    Go then into the temple, and reach down
    Those martial trappings from the golden nails
    On which they hang, and bring them to me swiftly.
    For this were infamous, while some are fighting,
    If others loiter slothfully behind.

                                            [_Exit_ SERVANT.

    CHOR. Time hath not yet debased that lofty soul
    ’Tis vigorous, though thy body be decayed.
    Why should’st thou enter on these fruitless toils,
    Which only injure thee, and to our city
    Can be of little service? on thy age
    Should’st thou reflect, and lay aside attempts
    That are impossible, for by no arts
    The long-lost force of youth canst thou regain.

    ALC. What schemes are these? distempered in your mind,
    Me and my children mean you to abandon?

    IOL. The battle is man’s province: to thy care
    Them I consign.

    ALC.            But if you die, what means
    Have I of being saved?

    IOL.                  The tender care
    Of the surviving children of thy son.

    ALC. Should they too meet with some severe mishap,
    Which may the gods forbid.

    IOL.                      These generous strangers
    Will not betray thee; banish every fear.

    ALC. In them I trust: I have no other friend.

    IOL. Jove too, I know, is mindful of thy toils.

    ALC. I will not speak in disrespectful terms
    Of Jove: but whether he his plighted troth
    Have kept, full well he knows.

    SER. [_returning._]            Thou here behold’st
    The brazen panoply, now haste to sheathe
    Thy limbs in mail; the battle is at hand,
    And Mars detests a loiterer: if thou fear
    Accoutrements so ponderous, to the field
    Advance disarmed, nor till thou join the ranks
    Wear these unwieldy trappings; for meantime
    I in my hands their burden will sustain.

    IOL. Well hast thou spoken; with those arms attend me
    Ready for the encounter, place a spear
    In my right hand, and under my left arm
    Hold me, and guide my steps.

    SER.                        Shall I conduct
    A warrior like a child?

    IOL.                    I must tread sure,
    Else ’twere an evil omen.

    SER.                      Would thy power
    Equalled thy zeal.

    IOL.              Haste: greatly ’twill afflict me
    If, left behind, I cannot join the fray.

    SER. Slow are thy steps, and hence thou deem’st I move not.

    IOL. Behold’st thou not the swiftness of my pace?

    SER. Thou to thyself I see appear’st to hasten,
    Although thou gain’st no ground.

    IOL.                            When in the field
    Thou seest me, thou wilt own I speak the truth.

    SER. What great exploit achieving? I could wish
    That thou might’st prove victorious.

    IOL.                                Through his shield
    Some foe transfixing.

    SER.                  We at length may reach
    Th’ embattled plain, but this I greatly fear.

    IOL. Ah, would to heaven, that thou, my withered arm,
    Again wert vigorous, as in former days
    Thee I remember, when thou didst lay waste
    The Spartan realms with Hercules; thus fight
    My battles now, and singly will I triumph
    Over Eurystheus, for that dastard fears
    To face the dangers of th’ embattled field:
    Too apt in our ideas to unite
    Valour with wealth, yet to the prosperous man
    Superior wisdom falsely we ascribe.

                             [_Exeunt_ IOLAUS _and_ SERVANT.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

            O fostering Earth, resplendent Moon,
            Who gladd’st the dreary shades of night,
            And thou, enthroned at broadest noon,
            Hyperion, ’midst exhaustless light,
            To me propitious tidings bring,
            Raise to the skies a festive sound,
            And waft the gladsome notes around,
            Till, from the palace of our king,
            They echo through Minerva’s fane:
            My house, my country, to maintain
            Against the ruthless spoiler’s pride,
            Menaced because this realm extends
            Protection to its suppliant friends,
        I with the sword our contest will decide.

    I. 2.

            Although there seem just cause for dread,
            When cities like Mycene blest,
            Whose triumphs fame hath widely spread
            Enter this region to invest
            Our bulwarks, harbouring ruthless hate.
            Think, O my country, think what shame,
            Should we reject the suppliant’s claim
            Appalled by Argos’ haughty state.
            Resistless Jove shall aid the spear
            I brandish unappalled by fear;
            The tribute of eternal praise
            From all that breathe, to him is due:
            Nor magnified by our weak view
        Shall men above the gods their trophies raise.

    II. 1.

            Descend with venerable mien,
            O thou our guardian and our queen,
            For on thy fostering soil we stand,
            These walls were reared by thy command,
        Drive from our menaced gates the lawless host,
            Suppress that Argive tyrant’s boast;
        For if by you unaided, is this hand
            Too weak their fury to withstand.

    II. 2.

            Thee, O Minerva, we adore,
            Thy altar ever streams with gore:
            We on each moon’s concluding day
            To thee our public homage pay;
        Through every fane harmonious numbers sound,
            Sweet minstrelsy then breathes around,
        And th’ echoing hills their nightly dance repeat
            As the nymphs move with agile feet.

SERVANT, ALCMENA, CHORUS.

    SER. O royal dame, the message that to you
    I bring, is both concise, and what reflects
    On me abundant glory to relate,
    In fight have we prevailed, and trophies reared
    On which the armour of your foes is hung.

    ALC. This day hath brought thee hither, O my friend,
    Thy freedom for such tidings to receive:
    But one anxiety there still remains
    To which thou leav’st me subject; much I fear
    For the important lives of those I love.

    SER. They live, and have obtained from all the host
    The greatest fame.

    ALC.              And Iolaus too,
    My aged friend?

    SER.            Yet more, he hath performed
    Through the peculiar favour of the gods
    Exploits most memorable.

    ALC.                    What glorious deed
    Hath he achieved in fight?

    SER.                      From an old man,
    He is grown young again.

    ALC.                    Thou speak’st of things
    Most wonderful. But first, how fought our friends
    With such success, I wish thee to inform me.

    SER. All that hath passed, at once will I relate
    When, to each other in the field opposed,
    We had arranged both armies, and spread forth
    The van of battle to its full extent,
    Hyllus alighting from his chariot, stood
    In the midway ’twixt either host, and cried:
    “Thou leader of the Argive troops, who com’st
    With hostile fury to invade this land,
    Thy interests recommend what I propose,
    Nor can Mycene suffer from the loss
    If thou deprive her of a single warrior;
    Therefore with me encounter hand to hand,
    And if thou slay me, seize and bear away
    The sons of Hercules; but if thou die,
    My palace and hereditary rank
    Permit me to enjoy.” The troops assented,
    And praised what he had spoken as the means
    Of finishing their labours, and a proof
    Of his exalted courage. But Eurystheus
    Unmoved by reverence for th’ assembled host
    Who heard the challenge, and with terror smitten,
    Forgot the general’s part, nor dared to face
    The lifted spear, but acted like a dastard:
    Yet he who was thus destitute of courage
    Came to enslave the sons of Hercules.
    Hyllus again retreated to his rank;
    The prophets too, when they perceived no peace
    Could be effected by a single combat,
    Without delay the blooming virgin slew,
    Auspicious victim, from whose pallid lips
    Her trembling spirit fled. The lofty car
    Some mounted, o’er their sides while others flung
    Their bucklers to protect them. To his host,
    Meantime the king of Athens, in a strain
    Worthy of his exalted courage, spoke:
    “Ye citizens, the land to which ye owe
    Your nourishment and birth, now claims your aid.”
    Equally loth to sully the renown
    Of Argos and Mycene, in like terms
    The foe besought his partners of the war
    Their utmost vigour to exert. No sooner
    Had the loud signal by Etruria’s trump
    Been given, than they in thickest battle joined.
    Think with what crash their brazen shields resounded,
    What groans and intermingled shouts were heard!
    First through our lines the host of Argos burst,
    And in their turn gave way: then foot to foot,
    And man to man opposed, in stubborn conflict
    We all persisted: multitudes were slain;
    But in this language either chief his troops
    Encouraged: “O ye citizens of Athens,
    O ye who till the fruitful Argive field,
    Will ye not from your native land repel
    The foul disgrace?” But with our utmost efforts
    Scarce could we put to flight the Argive host.
    When Iolaus saw young Hyllus break
    The ranks of battle, he with lifted hands
    Entreated him to place him in his car,
    Then seized the reins, and onward in pursuit
    Of the swift coursers of Eurystheus drove.
    As to the sequel; from report alone
    Let others speak, I tell what I have seen:
    While through Pallenè’s streets he passed, where rise
    Minerva’s altars, soon as he descried
    The chariot of Eurystheus, he a prayer
    Addressed to blooming Hebe, and to Jove,
    That for that single day he might recover
    The pristine vigour of his youth, and punish
    His foes as they deserve. You now shall hear
    What a miraculous event ensued;
    Two stars ’bove Iolaus’ chariot stood,
    And overshadowed it with gloomy clouds,
    Which, by the wise ’tis said, were Hercules
    Your son, and blooming Hebe: from that mist
    Which veiled the skies, the chief grown young again,
    Displayed his vigorous arms, and near the rocks
    Of Scyron, seized Eurystheus in his car.
    Binding his hands with chains, he hither brings
    The Argive tyrant, a distinguished prize,
    Who once was happy; but on all mankind
    Loudly inculcates by his present fortunes
    This lesson: not too rashly to ascribe
    Felicity to him who in appearance
    Is prosperous, but to wait till we behold
    His close of life; for fortune day by day
    Doth waver.

    CHOR.      Thou great author of success,
    O Jove, at length am I allowed to view
    The day, by which my terrors are dispelled.

    ALC. ’Twas late indeed, when thou, O Jove, didst look
    On my afflictions; yet am I to thee
    Most grateful for the kindness thou hast shown me.
    And though I erst believed not that my son
    Dwells with the gods, I clearly know it now.
    Now, O my children, ye from all your toils
    Shall be set free, and of Eurystheus, doomed
    With shame to perish, burst the galling yoke,
    Behold your father’s city, the rich fields
    Of your inheritance again possess,
    And sacrifice to your paternal gods,
    From whom excluded, in a foreign land
    Ye led a wandering miserable life.
    But with what sage design yet undisclosed,
    Hath Iolaus spared Eurystheus’ life,
    Inform me: for to us it seems unwise
    Not to avenge our wrongs when we have caught
    Our enemies.

    SER.        He through respect to you
    Hath acted thus, that you might see the tyrant
    Vanquished, and rendered subject to your power,
    Not by his own consent, but in the yoke
    Bound by necessity; for he was loth
    To come into your presence, ere he bleed,
    And suffer as he merits. But farewell,
    O venerable matron, and remember
    The promise you first made when I began
    These tidings, and, oh, set me free: for nought
    But truth should from ingenuous lips proceed.

                                            [_Exit_ SERVANT.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

              To me the choral song is sweet,
          When the shrill flute and genial banquet meet,
          If Venus also grace the festive board:
              I taste a more refined delight
          Now I behold my friends (transporting sight!)
          To unexpected happiness restored.
          For in this nether world, eventful Fate,
        And Saturn’s offspring Time, full many a change create.

    I. 2.

              Follow the plain and beaten way,
          From Justice, O my country, never stray,
          Nor cease the powers immortal to revere.
              To heights scarce short of frenzy rise
          The errors of that mortal, who denies
          Assent to truths confirmed by proofs so clear.
          Jove’s power by signal judgments is descried,
        Oft as his vengeance blasts the towering crest of pride.

    II. 1.

              In heavenly mansions with the blest,
          Thy son, O venerable dame, doth rest;
          He hath confuted those invidious tales,
              That to loathed Pluto’s house he came
          Soon as he perished in that dreadful flame:
          He under roofs of burnished gold regales,
          On the soft couch of lovely Hebe placed;
        Them two, both sprung from Jove, O Hymen, thou hast graced.

    II. 2.

              Events, which strike man’s wondering eyes,
          From a variety of causes rise.
          For fame relates how Pallas saved the sire,
              And from her city far renowned,
          Her race, protection have the children found;
          She hath suppressed th’ o’erweening tyrant’s ire,
          Whose violence no laws could ere control;
        Curse on such boundless pride, that fever of the soul.

MESSENGER, EURYSTHEUS, ALCMENA, CHORUS.

    MES. Your eyes indeed behold, O royal dame,
    Yet shall this tongue declare that we have brought
    Eurystheus hither, unexpected sight,
    Reverse of fortune his presumptuous soul
    Foresaw not, this oppressor little deemed
    That he should ever fall into your hands,
    When from Mycene, by the Cyclops’ toil
    Erected, he those squadrons led, and hoped
    With pride o’erweening to lay Athens waste;
    But Heaven our situation hath reversed:
    And therefore with exulting Hyllus joins
    The valiant Iolaus, in erecting
    Trophies to Jove the author of our conquest.
    But they to you commanded me to lead
    This captive, wishing to delight your soul:
    For ’tis most grateful to behold a foe
    Fall’n from the height of gay prosperity.

    ALC. Com’st thou, detested wretch? at length hath Justice
    O’ertaken thee? First hither turn thy head,
    And dare to face thine enemies: for, dwindled
    Into a vassal, thou no longer rul’st.
    Art thou the man (for I would know the truth)
    Who didst presume to heap unnumbered wrongs,
    Thou author of all mischief, on my son
    While yet he lived, wherever now resides
    His dauntless spirit? For in what one instance
    Didst thou not injure him? At thy command,
    Alive he travelled to th’ infernal shades;
    Thou sent’st, and didst commission him to slay
    Hydras and lions. Various other mischiefs,
    Which were by thee contrived, I mention not,
    For an attempt to speak of them at large
    Would be full tedious. Nor was it enough
    For thee to venture on these wrongs alone,
    But thou, moreover, from each Grecian state
    Me and these children hast expelled, though seated
    As suppliants at the altars of the gods,
    Confounding those whose locks are grey through age
    With tender infants. But thou here hast found
    Those who were men indeed, and a free city
    Which feared thee not. Thou wretchedly shalt perish,
    And pay this bitter usury to atone
    For all thy crimes, whose number is so great
    That it were just thou more than once shouldst die.

    MES. You must not kill him.

    ALC.                        Then have we in vain
    Taken him captive. But what law forbids
    His being slain?

    MES.            The rulers of this land
    Consent not.

    ALC.        Is it not by them esteemed
    A glorious action to despatch our foes?

    MES. Not such as they have seized alive in battle.

    ALC. Is Hyllus satisfied with this decree?

    MES. He, in my judgment, will forsooth act rightly,
    If he oppose what Athens shall enjoin.

    ALC. The captive tyrant ill deserves to live,
    Or longer view the sun.

    MES.                    In this first instance
    They did amiss, when by their swords he died not.

    ALC. Is it not just that he should suffer still?

    MES. He who will slay him is not to be found.

    ALC. What shall I say if some adventurous hand——

    MES. If you do this, you will incur great censure.

    ALC. I love this city, I confess: but no man,
    Since he is fall’n into my power, shall force
    This prisoner from me: let them call me bold
    And more presumptuous than becomes a woman,
    I am resolved to execute my purpose.

    MES. Full well I know the hatred which you bear
    To this unhappy man is terrible,
    And such as merits pardon.

    EUR.                      Be convinced
    Of this, O woman, that I cannot flatter,
    Nor to preserve this wretched life say aught,
    Whence they may brand me with a dastard’s name.
    For I with much reluctance undertook
    This contest; near in blood am I to thee,
    And of that race whence sprung thy son Alcides.
    But whether I consented, or was loth,
    Me Juno caused by her immortal power
    To harbour this dire frenzy in my breast.
    Since I became his foe, since I resolved
    Upon this strife, much mischief I devised,
    And brooded o’er it many a tedious night,
    That after I had wearied out and slain
    Those I abhorred, I might no longer lead
    A life of fear: for well I knew thy son
    Was no mere cipher, but a man indeed:
    Though strong my hate, on him will I confer
    The praise he merits from his valiant deeds.
    But after he was dead, was I not forced,
    Because I was a foe to these his sons,
    And knew what bitter enmity ’gainst me
    They from their sire inherited, to leave
    No stone unturned, to slay, to banish them,
    And plot their ruin? Could I have succeeded
    In these designs, my throne had stood secure.
    If thou my prosperous station hadst obtained,
    Wouldst thou not have attempted to hunt down
    The lion’s whelps, instead of suffering them
    At Argos unmolested to reside?
    Thou canst prevail on no man to give credit
    To such assertions: therefore, since my foes
    Forbore to slay me, when prepared to lose
    My life in battle, by the laws of Greece,
    If I now die, my blood will fix a stain
    Of lasting guilt on him who murders me.
    This city hath discreetly spared my life,
    More influenced by its reverence for the gods
    Than by the hatred which to me it bears.
    My answer to the charges thou hast urged
    Against me, having heard, esteem me now
    A suppliant, and though wretched, still a king,
    For such is my condition: though to die
    I wish not, yet can I without regret
    Surrender up my life.

    CHOR.                To you, Alcmena,
    A little wholesome counsel would I give,
    This captive monarch to release, since such
    The pleasure of the city.

    ALC.                      If he die,
    And to the mandates of th’ Athenian realm
    I still submit, what mischief can ensue?

    CHOR. ’Twere best of all. But how can these two things
    Be reconciled?

    ALC.          I will inform you how
    This may with ease be done. I, to his friends,
    When slain will yield him up, and with this land
    Comply in the disposal of his corse:
    But he shall die to sate my just revenge.

    EUR. Destroy me if thou wilt; to thee I sue not:
    But on this city, since it spared my life
    Through pious reverence, and forbore to slay me,
    Will I bestow an ancient oracle
    Of Phœbus, which in future times shall prove
    More advantageous than ye now suppose;
    For after death, so have the Fates decreed,
    My corse shall ye inter before the temple
    Of the Pallenian maid: to you a friend
    And guardian of your city, shall I rest
    Beneath this soil for ever; but a foe
    To those who spring from this detested race
    When with their armies they invade this land
    Requiting with ingratitude your kindness:
    Such strangers ye protect. But thus forewarned,
    Why came I hither? Through a fond belief
    That Juno was with far superior power
    To each oracular response endued,
    And that my cause she ne’er would have betrayed.
    On me waste no libations, nor let gore
    Be poured forth on the spot of my interment,
    For I to punish these their impious deeds,
    Will cause them with dishonour to return:
    From me shall ye receive a double gain,
    For you I will assist, and prove to them
    Most baneful e’en in death.

    ALC.                        Why are ye loth
    To slay this man, if what ye hear be true,
    That welfare to this city hence will spring,
    And your prosperity? For he points out
    The safest road. Alive he is a foe,
    But after he is dead will prove a friend.
    Ye servants bear him hence, and to the dogs
    Cast forth without delay his breathless corse:
    Think not, presumptuous wretch, that thou shalt live
    Again t’ expel me from my native land.

    CHOR. With this am I well pleased. My followers, go.
    For hence in our king’s sight shall we stand guiltless.




RHESUS.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    CHORUS OF TROJAN SENTINELS.
    HECTOR.
    ÆNEAS.
    DOLON.
    A SHEPHERD.
    RHESUS.
    ULYSSES.
    DIOMEDE.
    PARIS.
    MINERVA.
    THE MUSE.
    THE CHARIOTEER OF RHESUS.


SCENE.—BEFORE HECTOR’S TENT AT THE GATES OF TROY.

CHORUS, HECTOR.

    CHOR. Let some swift sentinel to Hector’s tent
    Go and inquire if any messenger
    Be yet arrived, who recent tidings bears
    From those, who during the fourth nightly watch
    Are by the host deputed. On your arm
    Sustain your head, unfold those low’ring eyelids,
    And from your lowly couch of withered leaves,
    O Hector, rise, for it is time to listen.

    HEC. Who comes? art thou a friend? pronounce the watchword.
    Who are ye, that by night approach my bed?
    Speak out.

    CHOR.      We guard the camp.

    HEC.                          Why com’st thou hither
    With this tumultuous haste?

    CHOR.                      Be of good cheer.

    HEC. I am. Hast thou discovered in the camp
    This night some treachery?

    CHOR.                      None.

    HEC.                            Why then deserting
    The post where thou art stationed, dost thou rouse
    The troops, unless thou through this midnight gloom
    Bring some important tidings? know’st thou not
    That near the Argive host we under arms
    Take our repose.

    CHOR.            Prepare your brave allies:
    Go to their chambers, bid them wield the spear,
    Rouse them from slumber, and despatch your friends
    To your own troop; caparison the steeds.
    Who bears the swift alarm to Pantheus’ son?
    Who to Europa’s offspring, Lycia’s chief?
    Where are the priests who should inspect the victims?
    Who leads the light-armed squadron to the field?
    And where are Phrygia’s archers? Let each bow
    Be strung.

    HEC.      Thy tidings are in part alarming,
    In part thou giv’st us courage, though thou speak
    Nought plainly. By the terrifying scourge
    Of Pan hast thou been smitten, that thou leav’st
    Thy station to alarm the host? Explain
    These clamorous sounds. What tidings shall I say
    Thou bring’st? Thy words are many, but their drift
    I comprehend not.

    CHOR.            All night long, O Hector,
    The Grecian camp hath kindled fires, the torches
    Amid their fleet are blazing, and the host
    Tumultuous rush to Agamemnon’s tent,
    At midnight calling on the king t’ assemble
    A council: for the sailors never yet
    Were thus alarmed. But I, because I fear
    What may ensue, these tidings hither bring,
    Lest you should charge me with a breach of duty.

    HEC. Full seasonably thou com’st, although thou speak
    Words fraught with terror: for these dastards hope
    They in their barks shall from this shore escape
    Ere I discover them: their kindled fires
    Prove this suspicion. Thou, O partial Jove,
    Hast robbed me of my triumph, like the prey
    Torn from the lion, ere I have destroyed
    With this avenging spear the Grecian host.
    Had not the sun withdrawn his radiant beams,
    I the successful battle had prolonged
    Till I had burnt their ships, and hewn a way
    Through their encampments, and in slaughter drenched
    My bloody hand. I would have fought by night
    And taken my advantage of the gales
    Sent by auspicious fortune: but the wise,
    And seers who knew the will of Heaven, advised me
    To wait but till to-morrow’s dawn appeared,
    And then sweep every Grecian from the land.
    But now no longer will they stay to prove
    The truth of what my prophets have foretold:
    For cowards in the midnight gloom are brave.
    Instantly therefore through the host proclaim
    These orders: “Take up arms, and rouse from sleep;”
    Pierced through the back as to the ships he flies,
    So shall full many a dastard with his gore
    Distain the steep ascent; the rest fast bound
    In galling chains shall learn to till our fields.

    CHOR. O Hector, ere you learn the real fact,
    You are too hasty: for we know not yet
    That they are flying.

    HEC.                  Wherefore then by night
    Are those fires kindled through the Grecian camp?

    CHOR. I am not certain, though my soul full strongly
    Suspects the cause.

    HEC.                If thou fear this, thou tremblest
    At a mere shadow.

    CHOR.            Such a light ne’er blazed
    Before among the foes.

    HEC.                  Nor such defeat
    In battle, did they e’er till now experience.

    CHOR. This have you done; look now to what remains.

    HEC. I give this short direction: take up arms
    Against the foe.

    CHOR.            Behold! Æneas comes:
    Sure, from his haste, some tidings, which deserve
    His friends’ attentive ear, the warrior brings.

ÆNEAS, HECTOR, CHORUS.

    ÆNE. What mean the watch, O Hector, who by night
    Were to their stations in the camp assigned,
    That they, with terror smitten, at your chamber
    In a nocturnal council have assembled?
    And why is the whole army thus in motion?

    HEC. Put on thy arms, Æneas.

    ÆNE.                        What hath happened?
    Are you informed that in this midnight gloom
    The foe hath formed some stratagem?

    HEC.                                They fly!
    They mount their ships.

    ÆNE.                    What proof have you of this?

    HEC. All night their torches blaze; to me they seem
    As if they would not wait to-morrow’s dawn:
    But, kindling fires upon their lofty decks,
    They sure fly homeward from this hostile land.

    ÆNE. But why, if it be thus, prepare your troops
    For battle?

    HEC.        As they mount the deck, this spear
    Shall overtake the dastards; I their flight
    Will harass: for ’twere base, and prejudicial
    As well as base, when Heaven delivers up
    The foe into our hands, to suffer those
    Who wronged us to escape without a conflict.

    ÆNE. Ah! would to Heaven you equally stood foremost
    In wisdom, as in courage: but one man
    By bounteous Nature never was endued
    With knowledge universal: various gifts
    Doth she dispense, to you the warrior’s palm,
    To others sapient counsels: now you hear
    Their torches blaze, you thence infer the Greeks
    Are flying, and would lead the troops by night
    Over the trenches: but when you have passed
    The yawning fosse, should you perceive the foes
    Instead of flying from the land, resist,
    With dauntless courage, your protended spear,
    If you are vanquished, to these sheltering walls
    You never can return: for in their flight
    How shall the troops o’er slanting palisades
    Escape, or, how the charioteer direct
    Over the narrow bridge his crashing wheels?
    If you prevail, you have a foe at hand,
    The son of Peleus, from your flaming torches
    Who will protect the fleet, nor suffer you
    Utterly to destroy the Grecian host
    As you expect; for he is brave. Our troops
    Let us then leave to rest from martial toils,
    And sleep beside their shields. That we despatch
    Amid the foe some voluntary spy,
    Is my advice: if they prepare for flight,
    Let us assail the Greeks; but if those fires
    Are kindled to ensnare us, having learned
    The enemy’s intentions, let us hold
    A second council on this great emprise.
    Illustrious chief, I have declared my thoughts.

CHORUS.

    I.

        These counsels I approve: thy wayward scheme,
            O Hector, change, and think the same:
            For perilous commands I deem,
        Given by the headstrong chief, deserve our blame.
            Why send not to the fleet a spy,
        Who may approach the trenches, and descry
        With what intent our foes upon the strand
            Have kindled many a flaming brand?

    HEC. Ye have prevailed, because ye all concur
    In one opinion: but depart, prepare
    Thy fellow-soldiers, for perhaps the host
    May by the rumours of our nightly council
    Be put in motion. I will send a spy
    Among the Greeks; and if we learn what schemes
    They have devised, the whole of my intentions
    To thee will I immediately reveal
    In person. With confusion and dismay
    But if the foe precipitate their flight,
    Give ear, and follow where the clanging trump
    Summons thee forth, for then I cannot wait,
    But will this night attack the Grecian host,
    Storm their entrenchments, and destroy their fleet.

    ÆNE. Despatch the messenger without delay.
    For you now think discreetly, and in me
    Shall find, when needed, in your bold emprise
    A firm associate.

                                              [_Exit_ ÆNEAS.

    HEC.              What brave Trojan, present
    At this our conference, as a spy will go
    T’ explore the Grecian navy? to this land
    What generous benefactor will arise?
    Who answers? for I singly cannot serve
    The cause of Troy and its confederate bands
    In every station.

    DOL.              For my native realm,
    Facing this danger, to the fleet of Greece
    I as a spy will go; and when I’ve searched
    Into the progress of our foes, return:
    But I on these conditions undertake
    The toilsome enterprise——

    HEC.                        Thou well deserv’st
    Thy name, and to thy country art a friend,
    O Dolon; for this day thy father’s house,
    Which is already noble, thou exalt’st
    With double fame.

    DOL.              I therefore ought to strive:
    But after all my labours let me reap
    A suitable reward. If gain arise
    From the performance of the task enjoined,
    We feel a twofold joy.

    HEC.                  This were but just:
    I contradict thee not: name thy reward;
    Choose what thou wilt, except the rank I bear.

    DOL. Your rich domains I wish not to possess.

    HEC. To thee a daughter of imperial Priam
    In marriage shall be given.

    DOL.                        With my superiors
    I will not wed.

    HEC.            Abundant gold is ours,
    If thou prefer this stipend.

    DOL.                        My own house
    With wealth is furnished, I am far remote
    From want.

    HEC.      What then dost thou desire that Troy
    Contains?

    DOL.      When you have conquered the proud Greeks,
    Promise to give me——

    HEC.                  I will give thee all
    That thou canst ask, except my royal captives.

    DOL. Slay them; I seek not to withhold your arm
    From cutting off the vanquished Menelaus.

    HEC. Is it thy wish, Oileus’ son to thee
    Should be consigned?

    DOL.                The hands of princes, nurtured
    Effeminately, are not formed to till
    The stubborn soil.

    HEC.              From which of all the Greeks
    Taken alive wouldst thou receive his ransom?

    DOL. Already have I told you, that at home
    I have abundant riches.

    HEC.                    Thou shalt choose
    Among our spoils.

    DOL.              For offerings let them hang
    High in the temples of the gods.

    HEC.                            What gift
    Greater than these canst thou from me require?

    DOL. Achilles’ steeds: for when I stake my life
    On Fortune’s die, ’twere reasonable to strive
    For such an object as deserves my toils.

    HEC. Although thou in thy wishes to possess
    Those steeds hast interfered with me: for sprung
    From an immortal race themselves immortal
    They bear Pelides through the ranks of war,
    Neptune, ’tis said, the king of ocean, tamed them
    And gave to Peleus: I, who prompted thee
    To this emprise, will not bely thy hopes,
    But to adorn thy noble father’s house,
    On thee Achilles’ generous steeds bestow.

    DOL. This claims my gratitude: if I succeed,
    My courage will for me obtain a palm,
    Such as no Phrygian ever won before:
    Nor should you envy me, for joys unnumbered
    And the first station in the realm, are yours.

                                             [_Exit_ HECTOR.

CHORUS.

    II.

        The danger’s great, but great rewards allure
          Thee, generous youth, t’ assert thy claim,
          Thrice blest if thou the gift procure,
        Yet will thy toils deserve immortal fame:
            Th’ allies of kings let grandeur tend,
        May Heaven and Justice thy emprise befriend,
        For thou already seem’st to have acquired
            All that from man can be desired.

    DOL. I am resolved to go: but my own doors
    First must I enter, and myself attire
    In such a garb as suits my present scheme,
    Thence will I hasten to the Argive fleet.

    CHOR. What other dress intend’st thou to assume
    Instead of that thou wear’st?

    DOL.                          Such as befits
    My errand and the stealth with which I travel.

    CHOR. We ought to gain instruction from the wise.
    What covering hast thou chosen for thy body?

    DOL. I to my back will fit the tawny hide
    Of a slain wolf, will muffle up my front
    With the beast’s hairy visage, fit my hands
    To his fore-feet, thrust into those behind
    My legs, and imitate his savage gait;
    Approaching undiscovered by the foe,
    The trenches and the ramparts that defend
    The navy: but whenever I shall come
    To desert places, on two feet I mean
    To travel: such deception have I framed.

    CHOR. May Hermes, Maïa’s offspring, who presides
    O’er well-conducted fallacies, assist
    Thy journey thither, and with safety lead
    Thy homeward steps! for well thou understand’st
    The business; there is nought which yet thou need’st
    But good success.

    DOL.              I shall return in safety,
    And having slain Ulysses, or the son
    Of Tydeus, bring to you their ghastly heads:
    For omens of assured success are mine:
    Then say that Dolon reached the Grecian fleet.
    These hands distained with gore, my native walls
    Will I revisit ere the sun arise.

                                              [_Exit_ DOLON.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          O thou, who issuing with majestic tread
        From Delian, Lycian, or Thymbræan fanes,
        Twang’st thy unerring bow; on Phrygia’s plains,
        Apollo, thy celestial influence shed,
            Hither come with nightly speed,
            The enterprising chief to lead
        Through mazes undiscovered by our foes;
            Aid thy loved Dardanian line,
            For matchless strength was ever thine,
        Constructed by thy hand Troy’s ancient bulwarks rose.

    I. 2.

          Speed Dolon’s journey to the Grecian fleet,
        Let him espy th’ entrenchments of their host;
        Again in triumph from the stormy coast
        Conduct the warrior to his native seat;
            May he mount that chariot drawn
            By steeds that browsed the Phthian lawn
        When our brave lord, the Mars of Greece, hath slain;
            Coursers of unrivalled speed,
            Which erst to Eacus’ seed
        To Peleus, Neptune gave who rules the billowy main.

    II. 1.

          His country, his paternal walls, to save,
        The generous youth explores the anchored fleet:
        From me such worth shall due encomiums meet.
        How few with hardy bosoms stem the wave,
            When Hyperion veils his face,
            And cities tremble on their base!
        At this dread crisis Phrygian heroes rise,
            Mysian chiefs, uncurbed by fear,
            Brandish with nervous arm the spear,
        Curst be the lying tongue that slanders my allies.

    II. 2.

          In savage guise now Dolon stalks arrayed,
        With step adventurous o’er the hostile ground:
        What Grecian chief shall feel the deadly wound,
        While the wolf’s hide conceals his glittering blade?
            Weltering first in crimson gore,
            May Menelaus rise no more;
        Next may the victor, Agamemnon’s head
            Bear to Helen, stung with grief
            At her affinity to that famed chief
        Who in a thousand ships to Troy his squadrons led.

A SHEPHERD, HECTOR, CHORUS.

    SHEP. Most gracious monarch, may I ever greet
    My lords with tidings such as now I bring!

    HEC. Full oft misapprehension clouds the soul
    Of simple rustics: to thy lord in arms
    Thou of thy fleecy charge art come to speak
    At this unseemly crisis: know’st thou not
    My mansion, or the palace of my sire?
    There ought’st thou to relate how fare thy flock.

    SHEP. We shepherds are, I own, a simple race,
    Yet my intelligence deserves attention.

    HEC. Such fortunes as befall the fold, to me
    Relate not, for I carry in this hand
    The battle and the spear.

    SHEP.                    I too am come
    Such tidings to unfold; for a brave chief,
    Your friend, the leader of a numerous host,
    Marches to fight the battles of this realm.

    HEC. But from what country?

    SHEP.                      Thrace, and he is called
    The son of Strymon.

    HEC.                Didst thou say, that Rhesus
    Hath entered Ilion’s fields?

    SHEP.                        You comprehend me,
    And have anticipated half my speech.

    HEC. Why doth he travel over Ida’s hill,
    Deserting that broad path where loaded wains
    With ease might move?

    SHEP.                I have no certain knowledge;
    Yet may we form conjectures; ’tis a scheme
    Most prudent, with his host to march by night
    Because he hears the plain with hostile bands
    Is covered: but us rustics he alarmed,
    Who dwell on Ida’s mount, the ancient seat
    Of Ilion’s first inhabitants, by night
    When through that wood, the haunt of savage beasts
    The warrior trod: for with a mighty shout
    The Thracian host rushed on, but we, our flocks,
    With terror smitten, to the summit drove,
    Lest any Greek should come to seize the prey,
    And waste your crowded stalls: till we discovered
    Voices so different from the Hellenian tribes,
    That we no longer feared them. I advanced,
    And in the Thracian language made inquiry
    Of the king’s vanguard, as they moved along
    To explore a passage for the host, what name
    Their leader bore, sprung from what noble sire,
    To Ilion’s walls he came, the friend of Priam.
    When I had heard each circumstance I wished
    To know, I for a time stood motionless,
    And saw majestic Rhesus, like a god,
    High in his chariot, drawn by Thracian steeds
    Whiter than snow, a golden beam confined
    Their necks, and o’er his shoulders hung a shield
    Adorned with sculptures wrought in massive gold;
    Like that which in Minerva’s Ægis flames,
    Bound on the courser’s front, a brazen Gorgon
    Tinkled incessant with alarming sound.
    The numbers of an army so immense
    I cannot calculate; the horse were many,
    Many the ranks of troops with bucklers armed,
    And archers; and a countless multitude,
    Like infantry in Thracian vests arrayed
    Brought up the rear. Such is th’ ally who comes
    On Troy’s behalf to combat; nor by flight,
    Nor by withstanding his protended spear,
    Can Peleus’ son escape him.

    CHOR.                      When the gods
    Are to a realm propitious, each event
    Is easily converted into bliss.

    HEC. Since I in battle prosper, and since Jove
    Is on our side, I shall have many friends;
    But those we need not who in former time
    Our toils partook not, with malignant blast
    When on the sails of Ilion Mars had breathed.
    Rhesus hath shown too plainly what a friend
    He is to Troy, for to the feast he comes,
    Yet was he absent when the hunters seized
    Their prey, nor did he share the toils of war.

    CHOR. You justly scorn such friends; yet, O receive
    Those who would aid the city.

    HEC.                          We who long
    Have guarded Ilion can defend it now.

    CHOR. Are you persuaded you have gained already
    A triumph o’er the foes?

    HEC.                    I am persuaded,
    And when to-morrow’s sun the heaven ascends
    This shall be proved.

    CHOR.                Beware of what may happen;
    Jove oft o’erthrows the prosperous.

    HEC.                                I abhor
    These tardy succours.

    SHEP.                O, my lord, ’twere odious,
    Should you reject with scorn the proffered aid
    Of our allies: the sight of such a host
    Will strike the foe with terror.

    CHOR.                            Since he comes
    But as a guest, not partner in the war,
    Let him approach your hospitable board,
    For little thanks are due from Priam’s sons
    To such confederates.

    HEC.                  Prudent are thy counsels,
    Thou too hast rightly judged: and in compliance
    With what the messenger hath said, let Rhesus
    Refulgent in his golden arms draw near,
    For Ilion shall receive him as her friend.

                                           [_Exit_ SHEPHERD.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

            Daughter of Jove, forbear to wreak
            Impending vengeance, though the tongue,
          O Nemesis, its boastful strain prolong:
          I the free dictates of my soul will speak.
          Thou com’st, brave son of that illustrious spring,
          Thou com’st thrice welcome to our social hall:
          At length doth thy Pierian mother bring
          Her favoured child, while ling’ring in his fall,
        Adorned by many a bridge, thee with paternal call.

    I. 2.

            Doth Strymon summon to the field: of yore
            When he the tuneful Muse addressed,
          A gliding stream he sought her snowy breast,
          Thee, lovely youth, the yielding goddess bore:
          To us thou com’st a tutelary power
          Yoking thy coursers to the fervid car:
          O Phrygia! O my country! at this hour
          Hastes thy deliverer glittering from afar,
        Him may’st thou call thy Jove, thy thunderbolt of war.

    II. 1.

            While swiftly glides th’ unheeded day,
            Again shall Troy without control
          Chant the young loves, and o’er the foaming bowl
          The sportive contest urge ’midst banquets gay;
          But Atreus’ sons desponding cross the wave,
          And sail from Ilion to the Spartan strand.
          Accomplish what thy friends foretold, O save
          These menaced walls by thy victorious hand,
        Return with laurels crowned, and bless thy native land.

    II. 2.

            To dazzle fierce Pelides’ sight,
            Before him wave thy golden shield
          Obliquely raised, that meteor of the field,
          Vault from thy chariot with unrivalled might,
          And brandish with each dexterous hand a lance;
          Whoever strives with thee shall ne’er return
          To Argive fanes, and join Saturnia’s dance,
          He by the spear of Thrace in combat slain,
        Shall lie a breathless corse on Troy’s exulting plain.

    Hail, mighty chief! ye Thracian realms, the mien
    Of him ye bore speaks his exalted rank.
    Observe those nervous limbs with plated gold
    Incased, and hearken to those tinkling chains
    Which on his shield are hung. A god, O Troy,
    E’en Mars himself, from Strymon’s current sprung,
    And from the Muse, brings this auspicious gale.

RHESUS, HECTOR, CHORUS.

    RHE. Thou brave descendant of a noble sire,
    Lord of this realm, O Hector, I accost thee
    After a tedious absence, and rejoice
    In thy success, for to the turrets reared
    By Greece, thou now lay’st siege, and I am come
    With thee those hostile bulwarks to o’erthrow,
    And burn their fleet.

    HEC.                  Son of the tuneful Muse,
    And Thracian Strymon’s stream, I ever love
    To speak the truth, for I am not a man
    Versed in duplicity; long, long ago,
    Should you have come to succour Troy, nor suffered,
    Far as on you depended, by our foes
    This city to be ta’en. You cannot say
    That uninvited by your friends you came not,
    Because you marked not our distress. What heralds,
    What embassies to you did Phrygia send,
    Beseeching you, the city to protect,
    What sumptuous presents did she not bestow?
    But you, our kinsman, who derive your birth
    From a barbarian stem, to Greece betrayed
    Us, a barbarian nation, though from ruling
    Over a petty state, by this right arm
    I raised you to the wide-extended throne,
    When round Pangæum and Pæonia’s realm
    Rushing upon the hardiest Thracian troops
    I broke their ranks of battle, and subdued
    The people to your empire: but you spurn
    My benefits, nor come with speed to succour
    Your friends in their distress. Though they who spring not
    From the same ancestors, observed our summons;
    Of whom full many in yon field of death
    Have tombs heaped o’er them, a most glorious proof
    Of faith unshaken; others under arms
    Their chariots mount, and steadfastly endure
    The wintry blasts, the parching flames of heaven,
    Nor on a gay convivial couch reclined
    Like you, O Rhesus, drain the frequent bowl.
    That you may know I yet can stand alone,
    Such conduct I resent; this to your face
    I speak.

    RHE.      I also am the same: my language
    Is plain and honest; I am not a man
    Of mean duplicity. My soul was tortured
    With greater anguish far than thou couldst feel,
    Because I was not present in this land;
    But Scythia’s tribes who near our confines dwell
    Made war against me just as I to Troy
    Was journeying; I had reached the Euxine shore
    To sail with Thracia’s host, the Scythian blood
    There stained our spears, and my brave troops expired
    ’Midst intermingled slaughter: this event
    Hindered my reaching Troy, and aiding thee
    In battle. Having conquered them, and taken
    For hostages their children, them I bound
    To pay me annual tribute; with my fleet
    Then crossed the Hellespont, and marched on foot
    Through various realms, nor, as thou proudly say’st,
    Drained the intoxicating bowl, nor slept
    Beneath a gilded roof, but to such blasts
    As cover with thick ice the Thracian wave,
    Or through Pæonia howl, was I exposed
    Wrapped in this mantle many a sleepless night.
    But I, though late, am in due season come:
    For this is the tenth year since thou hast waged
    An ineffectual war, day after day
    By thee is idly lavished, while the die
    Of battle ’twixt the Argive host and thine
    Spins doubtful ere it fall. But it for me
    Will be sufficient that the sun once mount
    The heavens, while I their bulwarks storm, invade
    Their fleet, and slay the Greeks. To my own home
    I the next day from Ilion will return,
    Thy toils soon ending: let no Trojan bear
    A shield: for with this spear will I subdue
    The boasters, though ’twas late ere I arrived.

    CHOR. My soul this language doth approve,
    Such friends as thou art sent by Jove,
    But humbly I that god beseech,
    To pardon thy presumptuous speech.
    The navy launched from Argos’ strand,
    Though freighted with a daring band,
    Neither in former times, nor now
    Contained a chief more brave than thou.
    How shall Achilles’ self withstand,
    Or Ajax meet, thy vengeful hand?
    O may the morn with orient ray
    Exhibit that auspicious day,
    When thou the victor’s prize shalt gain
    And dye with crimson gore the plain.

    RHE. Soon with exploits like these will I atone
    For my long absence: but, with due submission
    To Nemesis, I speak; when from the foe
    We have delivered this beleaguered city
    And seized their spoils for offerings to the gods;
    With thee to Argos will I go, invade,
    And ravage with victorious arms, all Greece,
    To teach them in their turn what ’tis to suffer.

    HEC. Could I escape from the impending stroke,
    And with that safety which we erst enjoyed
    These walls inhabit, I to Heaven should pay
    Full many a grateful vow: but as for Argos,
    As for the Grecian states, to lay them waste
    By arms were far less easy than you speak of.

    RHE. Is it not said the bravest chiefs of Greece
    Came hither?

    HEC.        Them I hold not in contempt,
    But long have kept at bay.

    RHE.                      When these are slain,
    We therefore each obstruction have removed.

    HEC. Forbear to think of distant prospects now,
    While our immediate interests lie neglected.

    RHE. Art thou so tame as to endure such wrongs
    Without retorting them?

    HEC.                    While I maintain
    What I possess, my empire is sufficient.
    But freely take your choice, or in the left
    Or the right wing, or centre of our host
    Display your shield, and range your troops around.

    RHE. I singly will encounter all our foes,
    O Hector; but if thou esteem it base
    Not to assist me when I burn their fleet,
    Because thou hast already toiled so long,
    Oppose me to Achilles in the front
    Of battle.

    HEC.      We at him no spear must aim.

    RHE. Yet was I told he sailed for Troy.

    HEC.                                    He sailed,
    And still is here, but angry with the chiefs,
    Refuses to assist them.

    RHE.                    In the camp
    Of Greece, say who is second in renown?

    HEC. Ajax, I deem, and Tydeus’ son are equal
    To any; but most fluent in his speech,
    And with sufficient fortitude inspired,
    Is that Ulysses, from whom Troy hath suffered
    Insults the most atrocious; for by night,
    Entering Minerva’s fane, he stole her image,
    And bore it to the Grecian fleet: disguised
    In tattered vest, that vile impostor next
    Entered the gates, and cursed the Argive host,
    Sent as a spy to Ilion; having slain
    The sentinels, he through the gates escaped,
    And in some fraudful scheme is ever found:
    At the Thymbræan temple is he stationed
    Hard by our ramparts, we in him contend
    With a most grievous pest.

    RHE.                      The valiant man
    Is never mean enough to slay his foes
    By stealth, he loves to meet them face to face;
    But, as for him, the recreant chief thou nam’st,
    Who lurking with a thievish purpose frames
    These dark contrivances, as through the gates
    I sally forth to combat, I will seize him;
    Driven through his back, my spear shall leave the miscreant
    Food for the vultures, for the impious robber
    Who spoils the temples of the gods deserves
    No better fate.

    HEC.            Now choose, for it is night,
    The spot for an encampment: I will show you
    A separate quarter where your troops must sleep.
    But mark me well, Apollo is the watchword;
    In case of an emergency, announce
    This signal to the Thracian host.

                                             [_Exit_ RHESUS.

                                      Extend
    The watch beyond the lines, and there receive
    Dolon our spy, who sallied forth t’ explore
    The navy of our foes; if he be safe
    He, by this time, the trenches must approach.

                                             [_Exit_ HECTOR.

CHORUS.

    I.

              Who comes this rampart to defend?
          The times assigned us sentinels is o’er;
          Yon fading constellation shines no more
          Now the seven Pleiades the heaven ascend,
              In ether view the eagle glide.
              Wake! what means this long delay?
              Rise and watch; now dawns the day?
          Saw ye the moon diffuse her radiance wide?
          Aurora is at hand: but at the gate
        (For Dolon sure returns) what faithful guard shall wait?

    SEMICHOR. To whom did the first watch belong?

    SEMICHOR.                                    ’Tis said
    Choræbus, son of Mygdon, is their chief.

    SEMICHOR. Who in his room was stationed?

    SEMICHOR.                                The Pæonians
    Called from their tent Cilicia’s hardy troops.

    SEMICHOR. The Mysians summoned us.

    SEMICHOR.                          Haste, let us seek
    The fifth division of the watch, and rouse
    Lycia’s brave warriors as by lot ordained.

CHORUS.

    II.

              Hark! couched on her ill-omened nest,
          Fell murderess of her son, in varied strains
          Near Simois’ banks the nightingale complains:
          What sounds melodious heave her throbbing breast!
              The flocks on Ida wont to feed
              Still browse o’er that airy height,
              Soothing the cold ear of night,
          Hark to the murmurs of the pastoral reed.
          Sleep on our closing eyelids gently steals;
        Sweet are its dews when morn her earliest dawn reveals.

    SEMICHOR. But wherefore doth not he draw near whom Hector
    Sent to explore the fleet?

    SEMICHOR.                  He hath so long
    Been absent that I tremble.

    SEMICHOR.                  If he fell
    Into some ambush, and is slain, we soon
    Shall have sufficient cause for fear.

    SEMICHOR.                            But haste,
    Rouse Lycia’s warriors as by lot ordained.

                                             [_Exit_ CHORUS.

ULYSSES, DIOMEDE.

    ULY. Heard’st thou, O Diomede, the sound of arms,
    Or in these ears did empty murmurs ring?

    DIO. No; but the steely trappings which are linked
    To yonder chariots, rattled, and I too
    With vain alarm was seized, till I perceived
    The coursers, who their clanging harness shook.

    ULY. Beware, lest in this gloom of night thou stumble
    Upon the sentinels.

    DIO.                Though in the dark
    We tread, I with such caution will direct
    My steps as not to err.

    ULY.                    But, should’st thou wake them,
    Thou know’st the watchword of their host.

    DIO.                                  I know
    It is Apollo; this I heard from Dolon.

    ULY. Ha! I perceive our foes have left these chambers.

    DIO. Here, Dolon told us, is the tent of Hector:
    ’Gainst him I wield this javelin.

    ULY.                              What hath happened?
    Is the whole squadron too elsewhere removed?

    DIO. Perchance they too ’gainst us may have contrived
    Some stratagem.

    ULY.            For Hector now is brave
    Since he hath conquered.

    DIO.                    How shall we proceed?
    For in this chamber him we cannot find,
    And all our hopes are vanished.

    ULY.                            To the fleet
    Let us in haste return: for him some god
    Protects, and crowns him with triumphant wreaths:
    We must not strive ’gainst Fortune’s dread behests.

    DIO. Then to Æneas will we go, or Paris
    That Phrygian most abhorred, and with our swords
    Lop off their heads.

    ULY.                But how, in darkness wrapt,
    Canst thou direct thy passage through the troops,
    To slay them without danger?

    DIO.                        Yet ’twere base,
    Back to the Grecian fleet should we return,
    No fresh exploit performing ’gainst the foe.

    ULY. What means this language? hast thou not performed
    A great exploit? have we not slain the spy
    Who to our navy went, and are not these
    The spoils of Dolon? how canst thou expect
    To spread a general havoc through their troops?
    Comply; let us retire: may Fortune speed
    Our progress homeward.

MINERVA, ULYSSES, DIOMEDE.

    MIN.                  With affliction stung,
    Why from the Trojan camp do ye retire?
    Although the gods forbid you to destroy
    Hector or Paris, heard ye not that Rhesus,
    A mighty chief, with numerous troops is come
    To Troy? If he outlives this night, nor Ajax,
    Nor can Achilles hinder him from wasting
    The camp of Greece, demolishing your walls,
    And forcing a wide passage through your gates
    With his victorious spear: him slay, and all
    Is yours; but go not to the couch of Hector,
    Nor hope to leave that chief a weltering trunk,
    For he must perish by another hand.

    ULY. Dread goddess, O Minerva, I distinguished
    Thy well-known voice: for midst unnumbered toils
    Thou ever dost support me: but, oh say,
    Where sleeps the mighty warrior thou hast named,
    And in what part of the barbarian host
    Have they assigned his station?

    MIN.                            Near at hand,
    And separate from the Phrygian troops, he lies;
    Hector hath placed him just without the lines
    Till morn arise; conspicuous in the gloom
    Of night, and close beside their sleeping lord,
    Yoked to the car his Thracian coursers stand,
    White as the glossy plumage of the swan:
    Them bear away when ye have slain their lord,
    A glorious prize, for the whole world can boast
    No car beside drawn by such beauteous steeds.

    ULY. Either do thou, O Diomede, transpierce
    The Thracian soldiers, or to me consign
    That task; meanwhile seize thou the steeds.

    DIO.                                        To slay
    The foe be mine; do you the coursers guide,
    For you are practised in each nicer art,
    And quick of apprehension. To each man
    Should that peculiar station be assigned
    In which he can be useful.

    MIN.                      But to us
    Paris I see is coming, who hath heard
    A doubtful rumour from the watch, that foes
    Enter the trenches.

    DIO.                Hath he any comrade,
    Or marches he alone?

    MIN.                Alone he seems
    To go to Hector’s chamber, to announce
    That there are foes discovered in the camp.

    DIO. Is it not first ordained that he shall die?

    MIN. You can no more, the Destinies forbid:
    For Hector must not perish by your hand;
    But haste to him on whom ye came to wreak
    Fate’s dreadful purposes: myself meanwhile
    Assuming Venus’ form, who ’midst the toils
    Of battle by her tutelary care
    Protects him, will with empty words detain
    Paris your foe. Thus much have I declared:
    Yet he, whom you must smite, though near at hand,
    Nor knows, nor hears, the words which I have uttered.

                            [_Exeunt_ ULYSSES _and_ DIOMEDE.

PARIS, MINERVA.

    PAR. General and brother, Hector, thee I call:
    Yet sleep’st thou? doth not this important hour
    Demand thy vigilance? some foes approach,
    Robbers or spies.

    MIN.              Be of good cheer; for Venus
    Protects you: I in all your battles feel
    An interest, mindful of the prize I gained
    Favoured by you, and am for ever grateful:
    Now to the host of Ilion I conduct
    Your noble Thracian friend, who from the Muse,
    Harmonious goddess, and from Strymon springs.

    PAR. To Troy and me thou ever art a friend.
    In thy behalf when I that judgment gave,
    I boast that for this city I obtained
    The greatest treasure life affords. But hither,
    Hearing an indistinct account, I come;
    For ’mong the guards there hath prevailed a rumour,
    That Grecian spies have entered Ilion’s walls:
    Though the astonished messenger who bore
    These tidings, saw them not himself, nor knows
    Who saw them: I on this account am going
    To Hector’s tent.

    MIN.              Fear nought; for in the camp
    No new event hath happened. To arrange
    The Thracian troops is Hector gone.

    PAR.                                Thy words
    Are most persuasive, and to them I yield
    Implicit credence. From all fears released,
    I to my former station will return.

    MIN. Go and depend upon my guardian care
    To see my faithful votaries ever blest;
    For you in me shall find a zealous friend.

                                              [_Exit_ PARIS.

ULYSSES, DIOMEDE, MINERVA.

    MIN. But now to you, my real friends, I speak.
    Son of Laertes, O conceal your sword,
    For we have slain the Thracian chief, and seized
    His coursers, but our foes have ta’en th’ alarm
    And rush upon you, therefore fly with speed,
    Fly to the naval ramparts. Why delay
    To save your lives when hostile throngs approach?

                                            [_Exit_ MINERVA.

CHORUS, ULYSSES, DIOMEDE.

    CHOR. Come on, strike, strike, destroy. Who marches yonder?
    Look, look, ’tis him I mean! these are the robbers
    Who in the dead of night alarmed our host.
    Hither, my friends, haste hither; I have seized them.
    What answer mak’st thou? tell me whence thou cam’st,
    And who thou art.

    ULY.              No right hast thou to know;
    Insult me, and this instant thou shalt die.

    CHOR. Wilt thou not, ere this lance transpierce thy breast,
    Repeat the watchword?

    ULY.                  That thou soon shalt hear;
    Be satisfied.

    1st SEMICHOR. Come on, my friends, strike! strike!

    2nd SEMICHOR. Hast thou slain Rhesus?

    ULY.                                  I have slain the man
    Who would have murdered thee: forbear.

    1st SEMICHOR.                          I will not.

    2nd SEMICHOR. Forbear to slay a friend.

    1st SEMICHOR.                          Pronounce the watchword.

    ULY. Apollo.

    2nd SEMICHOR. Thou art right; let not a spear
    Be lifted up against him.

    1st SEMICHOR.            Know’st thou whither
    Those men are gone?

    2nd SEMICHOR.      We saw not.

    1st SEMICHOR.                  Follow close
    Their steps, or we must call aloud for aid.

    2nd SEMICHOR. Yet were it most unseemly to disturb
    Our valiant comrades with our nightly fears.

                            [_Exeunt_ ULYSSES _and_ DIOMEDE.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

            What chief is he, who moved along;
            What daring plunderer fleet and strong,
            Shall boast he ’scaped my vengeful hand?
            How overtake his rapid flight?
            To whom compare him, who by night,
        With dauntless step passed through our armed band
            And slumbering guards? doth he reside
        In Thessaly, near ocean’s boisterous tide
        In Locris, or those islands scattered o’er
        The waves? whence comes he to this fell debate?
            What power supreme doth he adore?

    1st SEMICHOR. Was this Ulysses’ enterprise, or whose?

    2nd SEMICHOR. If we may form our judgment from the past,
    Who but Ulysses——

    1st SEMICHOR.      Think’st thou that it was?

    2nd SEMICHOR. Why not?

    1st SEMICHOR.          He is an enterprising foe.

    2nd SEMICHOR. What bravery? whom do you applaud?

    1st SEMICHOR.                                    Ulysses.

    2nd SEMICHOR. Praise not the treacherous weapon of a robber.

CHORUS.

    II.

            He entered Ilion once before,
            With foam his eyes were covered o’er,
            In tatters hung his squalid vest;
            He artfully concealed his sword,
            And sued for fragments from our board;
        Shorn was his head, and like a beggar dressed;
            He cursed with simulated hate
        Th’ Atrides, rulers of the Grecian state.
        May just revenge his forfeit life demand:
        Would he had perished as his crimes deserve,
            Before he reached the Phrygian land.

    1st SEMICHOR. Whether this deed was by Ulysses wrought
    It matters not, I shrink with fear, for Hector
    Will to us guards impute the blame.

    2nd SEMICHOR.                      What charge
    Can he allege?

    1st SEMICHOR.    He will suspect.

    2nd SEMICHOR.                  Why shrink
    With terror?

    1st SEMICHOR. ’Twixt our ranks they passed.

    2nd SEMICHOR.                              Who passed?

    1st SEMICHOR. They, who this night have entered Phrygia’s camp.

CHARIOTEER OF RHESUS, CHORUS.

    CHA. Alas! intolerable stroke of fate!

    1st SEMICHOR. Be silent.

    2nd SEMICHOR.            Rouse! for some one may have fallen
    Into the snare.

    CHA.            O dire calamity
    Of Troy’s allies, the Thracians!

    1st SEMICHOR.                    Who is he
    That groans?

    CHA.        Ah! wretched me, and O thou king
    Of Thrace, who in an evil hour beheld’st
    Accursed Ilion; what an end of life
    Was thine!

    CHOR.      But which of our allies art thou?
    For o’er these eyes the gloom of night is spread,
    And I discern thee not.

    CHA.                    Where shall I find
    Some of the Trojan chiefs? beneath his shield
    O where doth Hector taste the charms of sleep?
    To which of Ilion’s leaders shall I tell
    All we have suffered? and what wounds unseen
    Some stranger hath on us with ruthless hand
    Inflicted? but he vanished and hath heaped
    Conspicuous sorrows on the Thracian realm.

    CHOR. Some terrible disaster to the troops
    Of Thrace it seems hath happened, if aright
    I comprehend what I from him have heard.

    CHA. Our host is utterly destroyed, our king
    Hath been despatched by some foul secret stroke.
    How am I tortured by a deadly wound,
    Yet know not to what cause I must impute
    My perishing! ’Twas by the Fates ordained,
    That I, and Rhesus, who to Ilion led
    Auxiliar troops, ingloriously should bleed.

    CHOR. He in no riddle hath expressed the tale
    Of our misfortunes; he asserts too clearly
    That our allies are slain.

    CHA.                      We are most wretched,
    And to our wretchedness have joined disgrace,
    A twofold evil. For, to die with glory,
    If glory must be purchased at the expense
    Of life, is very bitterness I deem
    To him who bleeds (for what can make amends
    For such a loss as life); but to the living
    Is he the source of pride, from him his house
    Derives renown. But we, alas! like fools,
    Ignobly perish. Hector in the camp
    No sooner fixed our station, and pronounced
    The watchword, than we slept upon the plain,
    O’ercome with toil; no sentinels were stationed
    To watch our troops by night, nor were our arms
    Duly arranged, and to the harnessed steeds
    Hung no alarm bell; for our monarch heard
    That ye had proved victorious, and with ruin
    Threatened the Grecian fleet. Immersed we lay
    In luckless slumber; till disturbed in mind
    I started up, and with a liberal hand
    Measured the coursers’ food, resolved betimes
    To yoke them for the battle. I beheld
    Two men, who, in the midnight darkness, walked
    Around our camp; but when I moved, they fled,
    And disappeared immediately; with threats
    I bade them keep aloof: ’twas my conjecture
    That robbers, some of our own countrymen,
    Approached: they answered not, nor know I more.
    Returning to my tent, again I slept,
    And forms tremendous hovered in my dream.
    For near my royal master, as I stood,
    I saw two visionary wolves ascend
    Those coursers’ backs which I was wont to guide,
    Oft lashing with their tails they forced them on,
    Indignant breathing as they champed the bit,
    And struggling with dismay; but in attempting
    To drive away these ravenous beasts, I woke,
    Roused by the terrors of the night, and heard,
    Soon as I raised my head, expiring groans;
    The tepid current of my master’s blood,
    Yet gasping in the agonies of death,
    Besprinkled me. As from the couch I leaped
    Unarmed, and sought for weapons, some strong warrior
    Smote with his sword my ribs; the ghastly wound
    Displayed his might: prostrate I sunk to earth.
    Bearing the steeds away, and glittering car,
    They by the swiftness of their feet escaped,
    Tortured with pain, too faint to stand, I know
    Too well the dire calamity these eyes
    Beheld; but cannot say, or through what means,
    Or by the hand of whom, my lord was slain:
    Yet can I guess that by our friends we suffer.

    CHOR. O charioteer of Thracia’s wretched king,
    Be well assured this deed was by our foes
    Committed. For lo! Hector’s self, apprized
    Of this calamity, draws near; he feels
    Such anguish as he ought for thy disasters.

HECTOR, CHARIOTEER OF RHESUS, CHORUS.

    HEC. O ye accursed authors of this mischief,
    How did those spies, who by the foe were sent
    Thus, to your infamy, escape, and spread
    Dire havoc through the host; both as they entered
    And as they left the camp? Yet, unmolested,
    Ye suffered them to pass. Who should be punished
    But you? for you, I say, were stationed here
    To watch the camp; but they without a wound
    Are vanished, laughing at the Phrygian troops
    For their unmanly cowardice, and me
    Their leader. Be assured, by Jove I swear,
    All-gracious father, or the scourge or death
    Shall wait you for such guilt, else deem that Hector
    Is but a thing of nought, a very coward.

    CHOR. Great is, alas! my danger, mighty prince,
    The foe stole in while I to you conveyed
    Those tidings, that the Greeks around their ships
    Had kindled fires: through all the live-long night
    These watchful eyes have ne’er been sealed by sleep.
    By Simois’ holy fountain I conjure you,
    My royal lord, impute no blame to me,
    For I am wholly guiltless. If you learn
    That in my deeds or words I have offended,
    Plunge me alive beneath earth’s deepest vault;
    I ask no mercy.

    CHA.            Why dost thou upbraid
    These for the guilt? by plausible harangues
    Wouldst thou impose on thy barbarian friends;
    O thou barbarian, thou the bloody deed
    Didst perpetrate; nor can our slaughtered comrades,
    Nor we who linger pierced with ghastly wounds,
    Admit that ’twas another. There requires
    A long and subtle speech to make me think
    Thou didst not basely murder thy allies,
    Because the beauty of our steeds attracted
    Thy admiration, and on their account
    Hast thou slain those who at thy earnest prayer
    Landed on Ilion’s shore; they came, they died.
    With greater decency than thou observ’st,
    Who dost assassinate thy friends, did Paris
    The rites of hospitality infringe.
    Pretend not that some Grecian came unseen
    And smote us. Who subdued the Phrygian host,
    Who reached our quarters unobserved by Hector?
    Thou with the Trojan army wert before us;
    But who was wounded, who among thy troops
    Expired, when through their ranks as thou pretend’st
    The foe to us advanced? But I was wounded,
    And they, whom a more grievous ill o’ertook,
    No more behold the sun. To be explicit,
    I charge no Greek: what foe could come by night
    And find out Rhesus’ tent, unless some god
    Had told the murderers, for they sure knew nought
    Of his arrival? therefore all this mischief
    Must be thy sole contrivance.

    HEC.                          Our allies
    Have long assisted us since first the Greeks
    This realm invaded; and I never heard
    They to my charge imputed any crime.
    Could I begin with thee? by such desire
    For beauteous steeds may I be never seized,
    As to induce me to destroy my friends.
    Ulysses was the author of this deed.
    What Greek could have accomplished or contrived
    Such an exploit, but he? Him much I fear:
    My soul is also troubled lest he light
    On Dolon too, and slay him, for ’tis long
    Since he went forth, nor doth he yet return.

    CHA. I know not that Ulysses whom thou nam’st,
    Nor did a foe inflict this ghastly wound.

    HEC. Therefore retain, since thus to thee it seems,
    Thy own opinion.

    CHA.            O my native land,
    Might I but die in thee!

    HEC.                    Thou shalt not die:
    For of the dead the number is sufficient.

    CHA. Reft of my lord, but whither shall I turn?

    HEC. Thou in my house shalt careful treatment find,
    And healing balsams.

    CHA.                Shall the ruthless hands
    Of murderers dress my wounds?

    HEC.                          He will not cease
    Alleging the same charge.

    CHA.                      Perdition seize
    The author of this bloody deed! my tongue
    Has fixed no charge, as thou pretend’st, on thee;
    But Justice knows.

    HEC.              Conduct him to my palace
    With speed, that we may ’scape his clamorous plaints.
    But you must go, and to the citizens
    Proclaim, acquainting Priam, and the elders
    Who sit in council, first, that I direct
    The bodies of the slain shall be interred
    With due respect beside the public road.

                   [_Exit_ CHARIOTEER, _supported by one of_
                      HECTOR’S _Attendants_.

    CHOR. Why from the summit of exalted bliss
    Into fresh woes hath some malignant god
    Plunged Troy, why caused this sad reverse of fortune?

_The_ MUSE _appears in the air_, HECTOR, CHORUS.

    CHOR. High o’er our heads what deity, O king,
    Is hovering? in her hands a recent corse
    She bears: I shudder at the dreadful sight.

    MUSE. Ye Trojans, mark me well: for I a Muse
    Who by the wise am worshipped, hither come,
    One of the nine famed sisters, having seen
    The wretched fate of this my dearest son,
    Who by the foe was slain: but he who smote
    The generous youth, Ulysses, that dissembler,
    At length shall suffer as his crimes deserve.

    ODE.

    I.

        Parental anguish rends my breast,
        For thee my son, my son, I grieve,
        Thy mother sinks with woes oppressed.
        Why didst thou take this road, why leave
        Thy home, and march to Ilion’s gate,
        Where death did thy arrival wait?
        Oft with maternal zeal I strove
        Thy luckless courage to restrain,
        And oft thy sire opposed in vain.
        But now with ineffectual love,
        My dearest son, thee now no more,
        Thee, O my son, must I deplore.

    CHOR. As far as bosoms, by no kindred ties
    United, can partake a mother’s grief,
    Do I bewail thy son’s untimely fate.

    MUSE.

    II.

        On him your tenfold vengeance shed
        From Oeneus who derives his birth,
        Smite base Ulysses’ perjured head,
        Ye fiends who desolate the earth;
        Through them with agonizing pain
        I mourn my valiant offspring slain;
        May Helen too partake their doom,
        Who from her bridal mansions fled,
        And sought th’ adulterer’s Phrygian bed;
        For thou in Troy art to the tomb
        By her consigned; and many a state
        Bewails its bravest warriors’ fate.

    Much while on earth, and since thy murmuring ghost
    Was plunged in Orcus’ dreary mansions more,
    O offspring of Philammon, didst thou wound
    My soul: that arrogance which caused thy ruin,
    That contest with Pieria’s choir, gave birth
    To this unhappy youth: for having passed
    The rapid current, with incautious step
    Approaching Strymon’s genial bed, we mounted
    Pangæum’s summit, for its golden mines
    Distinguished; each melodious instrument
    Around us in full concert breathed; our strife
    Was there decided with the Thracian minstrel;
    That Thamyris who dared blaspheme our art,
    We of his eyes deprived. But since I bore
    Thee, O my son, through deference for my sisters,
    And for my own reputed chastity,
    Thee to the watery mansions of thy sire
    I sent; and Strymon, to no human care,
    But to the nymphs who haunt his limpid founts,
    For nurture did consign thee; from those virgins
    When, O my dearest son, thou hadst received
    The best of educations, thou becam’st
    Monarch of Thrace, the first of men. I felt
    No boding apprehensions of thy death;
    By thee, while marshalled on thy native ground,
    Athirst for blood the dauntless squadrons moved.
    But thee I cautioned, for I knew thy fate,
    That thou to Troy shouldst never go; but thee
    Th’ ambassadors of Hector and the Senate,
    By oft repeated messages, persuaded
    To come to the assistance of thy friends.
    Yet think not, O Minerva, thou sole cause
    Of my son’s fate, that thou these watchful eyes
    Hast ’scaped; Ulysses and the son of Tydeus
    Were not the authors of this bloody deed,
    Although they gave the wound. We sister Muses
    Honour thy city, in thy land we dwell.
    Orpheus, the kinsman of this hapless youth
    Whom thou hast slain, dark mysteries did unfold;
    And by Apollo, and our sister choir,
    Thy venerable citizen Musæus
    Was taught to soar beyond each warbled strain
    Of pristine melody: but in return
    For all these favours, bearing in my arms
    My son, I utter this funereal dirge;
    But I no other minstrel will employ.

    CHOR. Falsely the wounded Thracian charioteer
    Charged us with a conspiracy to slay him.

    HEC. Full well I knew, there needed not a seer
    T’ inform me, that he perished by the arts
    Of Ithacus. But was it not my duty
    When I my country saw by Grecian troops
    Besieged, to send forth heralds to my friends,
    Requesting them to aid us? I did send,
    And Rhesus came, by gratitude constrained,
    Illustrious partner of my toils. His death
    Lamenting, will I raise a tomb to grace
    The corse of my ally, and o’er the flame
    Strew tissued vests: for with confederate arms
    Dauntless he came, though piteous was his death.

    MUSE. They shall not plunge him in the yawning grave,
    Such vows will I address to Pluto’s bride,
    Daughter of fruitful Ceres, to release
    His ghost from the drear shades beneath: she owes
    To Orpheus’ friends such honours. But henceforth,
    Dead as it were to me, will he no more
    Behold the sun, we ne’er must meet again,
    Nor shall he see his mother, but shall lie
    Concealed beneath the caverns of that land
    With silver mines abounding, from a man
    Exalted to a god, restored to life,
    The priest of Bacchus, and of him who dwells
    Beneath Pangeum’s rock, a god adored
    By those who haunt his orgies. But ere long
    To yonder goddess of the briny waves
    Shall I bear doleful tidings: for by fate
    It is decreed, her offspring too shall die;
    But first our sisterhood, in choral plaints,
    Will sing of thee, O Rhesus, and hereafter
    Achilles, son of Thetis, shall demand
    Our elegiac strains, not she who slew
    Thee, hapless youth, Minerva, can redeem him;
    Such an inevitable shaft is stored
    In Phœbus’ quiver. O ye pangs that rend
    A mother’s breast, ye toils the lot of man;
    They who behold you in your real light
    Will live without a progeny, nor mourn
    With hopeless anguish o’er their children’s tomb.

                                           [_Exit the_ MUSE.

    CHOR. To bury the deceased with honours due,
    Will be his mother’s care: but if, O Hector,
    Thou mean’st to execute some great emprise,
    ’Tis now the time: for morn already dawns.

    HEC. Go, and this instant bid our comrades arm,
    Harness the steeds: but while ye in these toils
    Are busied, ye the signal must await,
    Th’ Etrurian trumpet’s clangour; for I trust
    I first shall o’er the Grecian host prevail,
    Shall storm their ramparts, and then burn their fleet,
    And that Hyperion’s orient beams will bring
    A day of freedom to Troy’s valiant race.

    CHOR. Obey the monarch: clad in glittering mail
    Let us go forth, and his behests proclaim
    To our associates; for that god who fights
    Our battles, haply will bestow success.




THE TROJAN CAPTIVES.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    NEPTUNE.
    MINERVA.
    HECUBA.
    CHORUS OF CAPTIVE TROJAN DAMES.
    TALTHYBIUS.
    CASSANDRA.
    ANDROMACHE.
    MENELAUS.
    HELEN.


SCENE.—BEFORE THE ENTRANCE OF AGAMEMNON’S TENT IN THE GRECIAN CAMP NEAR
TROY.

NEPTUNE.

    From the Ægean deep, in mazy dance
    Where Nereus’ daughters glide with agile feet,
    I Neptune hither come. For round the fields
    Of Ilion, since Apollo and myself
    With symmetry exact reared many a tower
    Hewn from the solid rock; the love I bore
    The city where my Phrygian votaries dwelt,
    Laid waste by Greece, where smoke e’en now ascends
    The heavens, hath ne’er been rooted from this breast,
    For on Parnassus bred, the Phocian chief
    Epeus, by Minerva’s arts inspired,
    Framed with a skilful hand, and through the gates
    Sent that accursed machine, the horse which teemed
    With ambushed javelins. Through forsaken groves,
    Through the polluted temples of the gods,
    Flow tides of crimson slaughter; at the base
    Of altars sacred to Hercæan Jove,
    Fell hoary Priam. But huge heaps of gold
    And Phrygian plunder, to the fleet of Greece
    Are sent: the leaders of the host that sacked
    This city, wait but for a prosperous breeze,
    That after ten years absence they their wives
    And children may with joy behold. Subdued
    By Juno, Argive goddess, and Minerva,
    Who leagued in Phrygia’s overthrow, I leave
    Troy the renowned, and my demolished shrines.
    For when pernicious solitude extends
    O’er cities her inexorable sway,
    Abandoned are the temples of the gods,
    None comes to worship there. Scamander’s banks
    Re-echo many a shriek of captive dames
    Distributed by lot; th’ Arcadians, some,
    Some the Thessalians gain, and some the sons
    Of Theseus leaders of th’ Athenian troops:
    But they whom chance distributes not, remain
    Beneath yon roof selected by the chiefs
    Of the confederate army. Justly deemed
    A captive, among them is Spartan Helen:
    And if the stranger wishes to behold
    That wretched woman, Hecuba lies stretched
    Before the gate, full many are her tears,
    And her afflictions many: at the tomb
    Of stern Achilles her unhappy daughter
    Polyxena died wretchedly, her lord
    The royal Priam, and her sons are slain,
    That spotless virgin too whom from his shrine
    Apollo with prophetic gifts inspired,
    Cassandra, spurning every sacred rite,
    Did Agamemnon violently drag
    To his adulterous bed. But, O farewell,
    Thou city prosperous once; ye splendid towers,
    Had not Minerva’s self ordained your fall,
    Ye still on your firm basis might remain.

MINERVA, NEPTUNE.

    MIN. May I accost the god who to my sire
    In blood is nearest, mighty, through high Heaven
    Revered, and lay aside our ancient hate?

    NEP. ’Tis well, thou royal maid: an interview
    ’Twixt those of the same house, is to the soul
    An efficacious philtre.

    MIN.                    I applaud
    Those who are temperate in their wrath, and bring
    Such arguments, O monarch, as affect
    Both you and me.

    NEP.            From all th’ assembled gods
    Some new commission bear’st thou, or from Jove,
    Or what celestial power?

    MIN.                    From none of these.
    But in the cause of Troy, whose fields we tread,
    I to your aid betake me, and would join
    Our common strength.

    NEP.                Hast thou then laid aside
    Thy former hate, to pity Troy, consumed
    By the relentless flames?

    MIN.                      First, thither turn
    Your views: to me will you unfold your counsels,
    And aid the schemes I would effect?

    NEP.                                With joy:
    But I meanwhile would thy designs explore,
    Whether thou com’st on the behalf of Greece,
    Or Troy.

    MIN.      The Trojans, erst my foes, I wish
    To cheer, and to embitter the return
    Of the victorious Grecian host.

    NEP.                            What means
    This change of temper? to excess thou hat’st
    And lov’st at random.

    MIN.                  Know you not the insult
    Which hath been shown to me, and to my temple?

    NEP. I know that Ajax violently tore
    Cassandra thence.

    MIN.              Yet by the Greeks unpunished
    He ’scaped, and e’en uncensured.

    NEP.                            Though the Greeks
    O’erthrew Troy’s walls through thy auxiliar might——

    MIN. And for this very cause will I conspire
    With you to punish them.

    NEP.                    I am prepared
    For any enterprise thou wilt. What mean’st thou?

    MIN. Their journey home I am resolved to make
    Most inauspicious.

    NEP.              While they yet remain
    Upon the shore, or ’midst the briny waves?

    MIN. As to their homes from Ilion’s coast they sail.
    For Jove will send down rain, immoderate hail,
    And pitchy blasts of air: he promises
    To give me too his thunderbolts to smite
    The Greeks and fire their ships; but join your aid,
    Cause the Ægean deep with threefold waves,
    And ocean’s whirlpools horribly to rage,
    Fill with their courses the unfathomed caves
    Beneath Eubœa’s rocks, that Greece may learn
    My shrines to reverence, nor provoke the gods.

    NEP. It shall be done: there need not many words
    To recommend thy suit. My storms shall rouse
    Th’ Ægean deep; the shores of Myconè,
    Scyros with Lemnos, all the Delian rocks,
    And steep Caphareus with full many a corse
    Will I o’erspread. But mount Olympus’ height,
    And from the Thunderer’s hand his flaming shafts
    Receiving, mark when the devoted host
    Of Greece weigh anchor. Frantic is the man
    Who dares to lay the peopled city waste,
    Temples with tombs profaning, and bereaves
    Of their inhabitants those sacred vaults
    Where sleep the dead; at length shall vengeance smite
    That hardened miscreant in his bold career.

                                                  [_Exeunt._

_The Scene opens, and discovers_ HECUBA _on a couch_.

    HEC. Arise, thou wretch, and from the dust uplift
    Thy drooping head; though Ilion be no more,
    And thou a queen no longer, yet endure
    With patience Fortune’s change, and as the tide
    Or as capricious Fortune wills, direct
    Thy sails, nor turn against the dashing wave
    Life’s stubborn prow, for chance must guide thy voyage.
    Alas! for what but groans belongs to me
    Whose country, children, husband, are no more?
    Oh, mighty splendour of my sires, now pent
    In a small tomb, how art thou found a thing
    Of no account! What portion of my woes
    Shall I suppress, or what describe, how frame
    A plaintive strain? Now fixed on this hard couch,
    Wretch that I am, are my unwieldy limbs.
    Ah me! my head, my temples, ah, my side!
    Oh, how I wish to turn, and to stretch forth
    These joints! My tears shall never cease to flow,
    For like the Muse’s lyre, th’ affecting tale
    Of their calamities consoles the wretched.
    Ye prows of those swift barks which to the coast
    Of fated Ilion, from the Grecian ports
    Adventurous launched amid the purple wave,
    Accompanied by inauspicious pæans
    From pipes, and the shrill flute’s enlivening voice,
    While from the mast devolved the twisted cordage
    By Egypt first devised, ye to the bay
    Of Troy did follow Menelaus’ wife,
    Helen, abhorred adult’ress, who disgraced
    Castor her brother, and Eurotas’ stream:
    She murdered Priam, sire of fifty sons,
    And me the wretched Hecuba hath plunged
    Into this misery. Here, alas! I sit
    In my loathed prison, Agamemnon’s tent;
    From princely mansions dragged, an aged slave,
    My hoary tresses shorn, this head deformed
    With baldness. But, alas! ye hapless wives
    Of Ilion’s dauntless warriors, blooming maids,
    And brides affianced in an evil hour,
    Together let us weep, for Ilion’s smoke
    Ascends the skies. Like the maternal bird,
    Who wails her callow brood, I now commence
    A strain far different from what erst was heard
    When I on mighty Priam’s sceptred state
    Proudly relying, led the Phrygian dance
    Before the hallowed temples of the gods.

                [_She rises, and comes forth from the tent._

SEMICHORUS, HECUBA.

    SEMICHOR. O Hecuba, what mean these clamorous notes,
    These shrieks of woe? for from the vaulted roof
    Thy plaints re-echoing smite my distant ear,
    And fresh alarms seize every Phrygian dame
    Who in these tents enslaved deplores her fate.

    HEC. E’en now, my daughter, at the Grecian fleet
    Th’ exulting sailors ply their oars.

    SEMICHOR.                            Ah me!
    What mean they? will they instantly convey me
    Far from my ruined country?

    HEC.                        By conjecture
    Alone am I acquainted with our doom.

    SEMICHOR. Soon shall we hear this sentence: “From these doors
    Come forth ye Trojan captives, for the Greeks
    Are now preparing to return.”

    HEC.                          O cease,
    My friends, nor from her chambers hither bring
    Cassandra, frantic prophetess, defiled
    By Argive ruffians, for the sight of her
    Would but increase my griefs.

    SEMICHOR.                    Troy, wretched Troy,
    Thou art no more, they to whom fate ordains
    No longer on thy fostering soil to dwell
    Are wretched, both the living and the slain.

CHORUS, HECUBA.

    CHOR. Trembling I come from Agamemnon’s tent,
    Of thee my royal mistress to inquire
    Whether the Greeks have doomed me to be slain,
    And whether yet along the poop arranged
    The mariners prepare to ply their oars.

    HEC. Deprived of sleep through horror, O my daughter,
    I hither came: but on the road I see
    A Grecian herald.

    CHOR.            Tell me to what lord
    Am wretched I consigned.

    HEC.                    E’en now the lot
    Is casting to decide your fate.

    CHOR.                          What chief
    To Argos, or to Phthia, me shall bear,
    Or to some island, sorrowing, far from Troy?

    HEC. To whom shall wretched I, and in what land
    Become a slave, decrepit like the drone
    Through age, mere semblance of a pallid corse,
    Or flitting spectre from the realms beneath?
    Shall I be stationed or to watch the door,
    Or tend the children of a haughty lord,
    Erst placed at Troy in rank supreme?

    CHOR.                                Alas!

    HEC. With what loud plaints dost thou revive thy woes!

    CHOR. I never more through Ida’s loom shall dart
    The shuttle, nor behold a blooming race
    Of children, in those lighter tasks employed
    Which suit the young and beauteous, to the couch
    Of some illustrious Greek conveyed, the joys
    Which night and fortune yields are lost to me;
    Or filled with water, from Pirene’s spring
    Shall I be doomed to bear the ponderous urn.

    HEC. O could we reach the famed and happy realm
    Of Theseus, distant from Eurotas’ tide,
    And curst Therapne’s gates, where I should meet
    Perfidious Helen, and remain a slave
    To Menelaus, who demolished Troy.

    CHOR. By fame’s loud voice I am informed, the vale
    Of Peneus, at Olympus base, abounds
    With wealth and plenteous fruitage.

    HEC.                                This I make
    My second option, next the blest domain
    Of Theseus.

    CHOR.      I am told that Vulcan’s realm
    Of Ætna, opposite Phœnicia’s coast
    The mother of Sicilian hills, is famed
    For palms obtained by valour. Through the realm
    Adjacent, bordering on th’ Ionian deep,
    Crathis the bright, for auburn hair renowned,
    The tribute of its holy current pours,
    And scatters blessings o’er a martial land.
    But lo, with hasty step a herald comes
    Bearing some message from the Grecian host!
    What is his errand? for we now are slaves
    To yon proud rulers of the Doric realm.

TALTHYBIUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    TAL. O Hecuba, full oft, you know, to Troy
    I, as their herald, by the Grecian host
    Have been despatched; you cannot be a stranger
    To me, Talthybius, who to you, and all,
    One message bring.

    HEC.              This, this, my dearest friends,
    Is what I long have feared.

    TAL.                        The lots are cast
    Already, if your terrors thence arose.

    HEC. Alas, to what Thessalian city saidst thou,
    Or to the Phthian, or the Theban realm
    Shall we be carried?

    TAL.                To a separate lord
    Hath each of you distinctly been assigned.

    HEC. To whom, alas, to whom am I allotted?
    What Phrygian dames do happier fortunes wait?

    TAL. I know; but be distinct in your inquiries,
    Nor ask at once a multitude of questions.

    HEC. Say who by lot hath gained my wretched daughter
    Cassandra?

    TAL.      Her the royal Agamemnon
    His chosen prize hath taken.

    HEC.                        As a slave
    To tend his Spartan wife? ah, me!

    TAL.                              No slave,
    But concubine.

    HEC.          What, Phœbus’ votive maid,
    To whom the god with golden tresses gave
    This privilege, that she should pass her life
    In celibacy?

    TAL.        With the shafts of love
    Hath the prophetic nymph transpierced his breast.

    HEC. My daughter, cast the sacred keys away,
    And rend the garlands thou with pride didst wear.

    TAL. Is it not great for captives to ascend
    The regal couch?

    HEC.            But where is she whom late
    Ye took away, and whither have ye borne
    That daughter?

    TAL.          Speak you of Polyxena,
    Or for whom else would you inquire?

    HEC.                                On whom
    Hath chance bestowed her?

    TAL.                      At Achilles’ tomb
    It is decreed that she shall minister.

    HEC. Wretch that I am! for his sepulchral rites
    Have I then borne a priestess? but what law
    Is this, what Grecian usage, O my friend?

    TAL. Esteem your daughter happy; for with her
    All now is well.

    HEC.            What saidst thou? doth she live?

    TAL. ’Tis her peculiar fate to be released
    From all affliction.

    HEC.                But, alas! what fortune
    Attends the warlike Hector’s captive wife,
    How fares it with the lost Andromache?

    TAL. Her to Achilles’ son hath from the band
    Of captives chosen.

    HEC.                As to me who need
    For a third foot, the staff which in these hands
    I hold, whose head is whitened o’er with age,
    To whom am I a slave?

    TAL.                  By lot the king
    Of Ithaca Ulysses hath obtained you.

    HEC. Alas! alas! let your shorn temples feel
    The frequent blow; rend your discoloured cheeks.
    Ah me! I am allotted for a slave
    To a detestable and treacherous man,
    Sworn foe of justice, to that lawless viper,
    With double tongue confounding all, ’twixt friends
    Exciting bitter hate. Ye Trojan dames,
    O shed the sympathizing tear: I sink
    Beneath the pressure of relentless fate.

    CHOR. Thy doom, O queen, thou know’st: but to what chief,
    Hellenian or Achaian, I belong
    Inform me.

    TAL.      Peace! Conduct Cassandra hither
    With speed, ye guards, into our general’s hands
    When I his captive have delivered up,
    That we the rest may portion out. Why gleams
    That blazing torch within? would Ilion’s dames
    Their chambers fire? what mean they? doomed to leave
    This land, and to be borne to Argive shores,
    Are they resolved to perish in the flames?
    The soul, inspired with an unbounded love
    Of freedom, ill sustains such woes. Burst open
    The doors, lest, to their honour and the shame
    Of Greece, on me the censure fall.

    HEC.                              They kindle
    No conflagration, but, with frantic step,
    My daughter, lo! Cassandra rushes hither.

CASSANDRA, TALTHYBIUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    CAS. Avaunt! the sacred flame I bring
    With reverential awe profound,
    And wave the kindled torch around,
    O Hymen, thou benignant king.
    The bridegroom comes with jocund pride,
    I too am styled a happy bride,
    My name through Argos’ streets shall ring,
    O Hymen, thou benignant king!
    While thou attend’st my father’s bier,
    O Hecuba, with many a tear,
    While Ilion’s ramparts overthrown
    From thee demand th’ incessant groan,
    Ere the bright sun withhold his ray,
    E’en in the glaring front of day,
    I bid the nuptial incense blaze
    To thee, O Hymen, thee whose power
    Invoking at her bridal hour
    The bashful virgin comes. Yon maze
    Encircling, ’mid the choral dance,
    As ancient usage bids, advance,
    And in thy hand a flaming pine,
    O mother, brandish. God of wine,
    Thy shouting votaries hither bring,
    As if in Ilion thou hadst found
    Old Priam still a happy king.
    Range that holy group around,
    O Phœbus, in thy laureate mead,
    Thy temple, shall the victim bleed.
    Let Hymen, Hymen, Hymen, sound.
    My mother, for the dance prepare,
    Vault nimbly, and our revels share.
    At Hymen’s shrine, my friends, prolong
    Your vows, awake th’ ecstatic song;
    In honour of my bridal day,
    Chant, Phrygian nymphs, the choral lay,
    And celebrate the chief whom fate
    Ordains to be Cassandra’s mate.

    CHOR. Wilt thou not stop the princess, lest she rush
    With frantic step amid the Grecian host?

    HEC. O Vulcan, wont to light the bridal torch,
    Now dost thou brandish an accursed flame;
    My soul foresaw not this. Alas! my daughter,
    I little thought, that ’midst the din of arms,
    Or while we crouch beneath the Argive spear,
    Thou couldst have celebrated such espousals.
    Give me the torch, for while with frantic speed
    Thou rushest on, it trembles in thy hand.
    Nor yet have thy afflictions, O my daughter,
    Brought back thy wandering reason, thou remain’st
    Disordered as before. Ye Trojan dames,
    Remove yon blazing pines, and in the stead
    Of these her bridal songs let tears express
    The anguish of your souls.

    CAS.                      O mother, place
    A laureate wreath on my victorious brow,
    Exulting lead me to the monarch’s bed.
    And if for thee too slowly I advance,
    Drag me along by force; for I am now
    No more the spouse of Phœbus; but that king
    Of Greece, famed Agamemnon, shall in me
    Take to his arms a bride more inauspicious
    Than even Helen’s self: him will I smite,
    And lay his palace waste, in great revenge
    For my slain sire and brothers. But I cease
    These menaces, and speak not of the axe
    Which shall smite me and others, or the conflict
    My wedlock shall produce, whence by the hands
    Of her own son a mother shall be slain,
    And th’ overthrow of Atreus’ guilty house.
    This city will I prove to have been happier
    Than the victorious Greeks (for though the gods
    Inspire, I curb the transports of my soul),
    Who for one single woman, to regain
    The beauteous Helen only, wasted lives
    Unnumbered. Their wise leader, in the cause
    Of those he hated, slew whom most he loved;
    He to his brother yielded up his daughter,
    Joy of his house, for that vile woman’s sake,
    Who with her own consent, and not by force,
    Was borne away. But at Scamander’s banks
    When they arrived, they died, though not by exile
    Torn from their country, or their native towers:
    But them who in embattled fields were slain
    Their children saw not, nor in decent shroud
    Were they enwrapped by their loved consorts’ hands,
    But lie deserted on a foreign coast:
    Their sorrows also who remained at home
    Are similar; in widowhood forlorn
    Some die; and others, of their own brave sons
    Deprived, breed up the children of a stranger;
    Nor at their slighted tombs is blood poured forth
    To drench the thirsty ground. Their host deserves
    Praises like these. ’Tis better not to speak
    Of what is infamous, nor shall my Muse
    Record the shameful tale. But, first and greatest
    Of glories, in their country’s cause expired
    The Trojans; the remains of those who fell
    In battle, by their friends borne home, obtained
    Sepulchral honours in their native soil,
    That duteous office kindred hands performed:
    While every Phrygian who escaped the sword
    Still with his wife and children did reside,
    Joy to the Greeks unknown. Now hear the fate
    Of Hector, him whom thou bewail’st, esteemed
    The bravest of our heroes, by the Greeks
    Landing on Ilion’s coast the warrior fell;
    In their own country had the foe remained,
    His valour ne’er had been displayed: but Paris
    Wedded the daughter of imperial Jove,
    In her possessing an illustrious bride.
    It is the wise man’s duty to avoid
    Perilous war. After the die is cast,
    He who undaunted meets the fatal stroke,
    Adds to his native city fair renown;
    But the last moments of a coward shame
    The land which gave him birth. Forbear to weep,
    My mother, for thy ruined country’s fate;
    Weep not because thou seest thy daughter borne
    To Agamemnon’s bed, for by these spousals
    Our most inveterate foes shall I destroy.

    CHOR. How sweetly ’midst the sorrows of thy house
    Thou smil’st! ere long perchance wilt thou afford
    A melancholy instance that thy strains
    Are void of truth.

    TAL.              Had not Apollo fired
    E’en to distraction thy perverted soul,
    Thou on my honoured leader, ere he quit
    The shores of Ilion, shouldst not unavenged
    Pour forth these omens. But, alas! the great,
    And they who in th’ opinion of mankind
    Are wise, in no respect excel the vulgar.
    For the dread chieftain of the Grecian host,
    The son of Atreus, loves with boundless passion
    This damsel frantic as the Mænades.
    Myself am poor, yet would not I accept
    A wife like her. Since thou hast lost thy reason,
    I to the winds consign thy bitter taunts
    ’Gainst Argos, with the praises thou bestow’st
    On Troy. Thou bride of Agamemnon, come,
    Follow me to the fleet. But when Ulysses
    Would bear you hence, O Hecuba, obey
    The summons, you are destined to attend
    A queen called virtuous by all those who come
    To Ilion.

    CAS.      Arrogant, detested slave!
    All heralds are like thee, the public scorn,
    Crouching with abject deference to some king
    Or city. Say’st thou, “To Ulysses’ house
    My mother shall be borne?” Of what account
    Were then the oracles Apollo gave
    Uttered by me his priestess, which declare,
    “She here shall die?” I spare the shameful tale.
    He knows not, the unhappy Ithacus,
    What evils yet await him, in the tears
    Of me and every captive Phrygian maid,
    While he exults, and deems our misery gain.
    Ten more long years elapsed beyond the term
    Spent in besieging Ilion, he alone
    Shall reach his country; witness thou who dwell’st
    ’Midst ocean’s straits tempestuous, dire Charybdis,
    Ye mountains where on human victims feast
    The Cyclops, with Ligurian Circe’s isle,
    Whose wand transforms to swine, the billowy deep,
    Covered with shipwrecks, the bewitching Lotus,
    The sacred Oxen of the Sun, whose flesh
    Destined to utter a tremendous voice
    The banquet shall embitter: he at length,
    In a few words his history to comprise,
    Alive must travel to the shades beneath,
    And hardly ’scaping from a watery grave
    In his own house find evils numberless.
    But why do I recount Ulysses’ toils?
    Lead on, that I the sooner in the realms
    Of Pluto, with that bridegroom may consummate
    My nuptials. Ruthless miscreant as thou art,
    Thou in the tomb ignobly shalt be plunged
    At midnight; nor shall the auspicious beams
    Of day illumine thy funereal rites,
    O leader of the Grecian host, who deem’st
    That thou a mighty conquest hast achieved.
    Near to my lord’s remains, and in that vale,
    Where down a precipice the torrent foams,
    My corse shall to the hungry wolves be thrown,
    The corse of Phœbus’ priestess. O ye wreaths
    Of him whom best of all the gods I loved,
    Adieu, ye symbols of my holy office,
    I leave those feasts the scenes of past delight,
    Torn from my brows avaunt, for I retain
    My chastity unsullied still; the winds
    To thee shall waft them, O prophetic king.
    Where is your general’s bark, which I am doomed
    T’ ascend? the rising breezes shall unfurl
    Your sails this instant; for in me ye bear
    One of the three Eumenides from Troy.
    Farewell, my mother, weep not for my fate,
    O my dear country, my heroic brothers,
    And aged father, in the realms beneath,
    Ere long shall ye receive me: but victorious
    Will I descend among the mighty dead,
    When I have laid th’ accursed mansions waste
    Of our destroyers, Atreus’ impious sons.

                       [_Exeunt_ CASSANDRA _and_ TALTHYBIUS.

    CHOR. Attendants of the aged Hecuba,
    Behold ye not your mistress, how she falls
    Upon the pavement speechless? Why neglect
    To prop her sinking frame! Ye slothful nymphs,
    Raise up this woman, whom a weight of years
    Bows to the dust.

    HEC.              Away, and on this spot
    Allow me, courteous damsels, to remain:
    No longer welcome as in happier days
    Are your kind offices; this humble posture,
    This fall best suits my present lowly state,
    Best suits what I already have endured
    And still am doomed to suffer. O ye gods,
    In you I call upon no firm allies,
    Yet sure ’tis decent to invoke the gods
    When we by adverse fortune are opprest.
    First, therefore, all the blessings I enjoyed
    Would I recount, hence shall my woes demand
    The greater pity. Born to regal state,
    And with a mighty king in wedlock joined,
    A race of valiant sons did I produce;
    I speak not of their numbers, but the noblest
    Among the Phrygian youths, such as no Trojan,
    Nor Grecian, nor barbarian dame could boast:
    Them saw I fall beneath the hostile spear,
    And at their tomb these tresses cut: their sire,
    The venerable Priam, I bewailed not,
    From being told of his calamitous fate
    By others, but these eyes beheld him slain,
    E’en at the altar of Hercæan Jove,
    And Ilion taken. I those blooming maids
    Have also lost, whom with maternal love
    I nurtured for some noble husband’s bed;
    They from these arms are torn: nor can I hope
    Or to be seen by them, or e’er to see
    My children more. But last of all, to crown
    My woes, an aged slave, shall I be borne
    To Greece; and in such tasks will they employ me
    As are most grievous in the wane of life;
    Me, who am Hector’s mother, at the door
    Stationed to keep the keys, or knead the bread,
    And on the pavement stretch my withered limbs,
    Which erst reposed upon a regal couch,
    And in such tattered vestments, as belie
    My former rank, enwrap my wasted frame.
    Wretch that I am, who, through one woman’s nuptials,
    Have borne, and am hereafter doomed to bear,
    Such dreadful ills. O my unhappy daughter,
    Cassandra, whom the gods have rendered frantic,
    With what sad omens hath thy virgin zone
    Been loosed! and where, Polyxena, art thou,
    O virgin most unfortunate? but none
    Of all my numerous progeny, or male
    Or female, comes to aid their wretched mother.
    Why, therefore, would ye lift me up? what room
    Is there for hope? me who with tender foot
    Paced through the streets of Troy, but now a slave,
    Drag from the palace to the rushy mat
    And stony pillow, that where’er I fall
    There may I die, through many, many tears
    Exhausted. Of the prosperous and the great
    Pronounce none happy till the hour of death.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

            Prepare, O Muse, prepare a song
            Expressive of the fall of Troy;
            The sympathetic dirge prolong
            And banish every note of joy.
          I with loud voice of Ilion’s fate will speak,
            Sing how the foe our ramparts stormed
            Through the machine their treachery formed,
          The vehicle of many a daring Greek,
          Who burst like thunder from that wooden steed,
          With gorgeous trappings graced, in mimic state,
        Concealing armed bands, which passed the Scæan gate,
            They whom such semblance could mislead,
              The unsuspecting crowd,
            As on Troy’s citadel they stood,
            Exclaimed; “Henceforth our toils shall cease,
          Come on, and to Minerva’s fane convey
            This holy image, pledge of peace.”
          What veteran paused? what youth but led the way?
          Enlivening songs breathed round in notes so sweet,
        That gladly they received the pestilential cheat.

    II.

            Then did all Phrygia’s race combine
            Through their devoted gates to bear,
            Enclosed in the stupendous pine
            The fraud of Greece, that latent snare,
          To glut Minerva with Dardanian blood,
            To pacify th’ immortal maid,
            They the huge mass with ropes conveyed:
          Thus the tall bark, into the briny flood
          Too ponderous to be borne, is rolled along:
          Till they had lodged it in th’ ill-omened fane
        Of her to whom we owe our ruined country’s bane.
            After their toil and festive song,
              The cloud-wrapped evening spread
            Her veil o’er each devoted head,
            Shrill Phrygian voices did resound,
            And Libya’s flutes accompanied the choir,
          While nymphs high vaulting from the ground,
          Mixed their applauses with the chorded lyre,
          And from each hearth the flames with radiance bright,
        While heedless warriors slept, dispelled the shades of night.

    III.

          Then o’er the genial board, to her who reigns
          In woodland heights, Diana, child of Jove,
              I waked the choral strains.
            But soon there flew a dismal sound
            Pergamus’ wide streets around:
            The shrieking infant fondly strove
          To grasp the border of a mother’s vest,
        And with uplifted hands its little fears expressed:
          Mars from his ambush by Minerva’s aid
        Conspicuous issued and the fray began,
          Thick gore adown our altars ran,
        And many a slaughtered youth was laid
          A headless trunk on the disfigured bed,
        That Greece might shine with laureate wreaths arrayed,
          By Troy while fruitless tears are shed.

ANDROMACHE, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    CHOR. Seest thou, Andromache, O queen, this way
    Advancing, wafted in a foreign car?
    Eager to cling to the maternal breast
    Close follows her beloved Astyanax,
    The son of Hector.

    HEC.              Whither art thou borne,
    O wretched woman, on a chariot placed
    ’Midst Hector’s brazen armour, and those spoils
    From captive Phrygian chiefs in combat torn,
    With which Achilles’ son from Ilion’s siege
    Triumphant, will the Phthian temples grace?

    AND. Our Grecian masters drag me hence.

    HEC.                                    Alas!

    AND. Why with your groans my anguish strive t’ assuage?

    HEC. Oh!

    AND.      I by griefs am compassed——

    HEC.                                  Mighty Jove!

    AND. And dread vicissitudes of fate.

    HEC.                                My children.

    AND. We once were blest.

    HEC.                    Now are those prosperous days
    No more; and Ilion is no more.

    AND.                          Most wretched!

    HEC. My noble sons.

    AND.                Alas!

    HEC.                    Alas my——

    AND.                              Woes.

    HEC. O piteous fortune——

    AND.                      Of the city——

    HEC.                                  Wrapt
    In smoke.

    AND.      Return, my husband, O return.

    HEC. In clamorous accents thou invok’st my son,
    Whom Pluto’s realms detain, unhappy woman.

    AND. Thy consort’s tutelary power.

    HEC.                              And thou,
    Whose courage long withstood the Grecian host,
    Thou aged father of our numerous race,
    Lead me, O Priam, to the shades beneath.

    AND. Presumptuous are such wishes.

    HEC.                              We endure
    These grievous woes.

    CHOR.                While ruin overwhelms
    Our city, for on sorrows have been heaped
    Fresh sorrows, through the will of angry Heaven,
    Since in an evil hour thy son was snatched
    From Pluto, who, determined to avenge
    Those execrable nuptials, with the ground
    Hath levelled Pergamus’ beleaguered towers.
    Near Pallas’ shrine the corses of the slain
    Weltering in gore to vultures lie exposed,
    And Ilion droops beneath the servile yoke.
    Thee, O my wretched country, I with tears
    Forsake: e’en now thou view’st the piteous end
    Of all thy woes, and my loved native house.

    HEC. My children! O my desolated city!
    Your mother is bereft of every joy.

    CHOR. What shrieks, what plaints resound! what floods of tears
    Stream in our houses! but the dead forget
    Their sorrows, and for ever cease to weep.

    HEC. To those who suffer, what a sweet relief
    Do tears afford! the sympathetic Muse
    Inspires their plaints.

    AND.                    O mother of that chief,
    Whose forceful javelin thinned the ranks of Greece,
    Illustrious Hector, seest thou this?

    HEC.                                I see
    The gods delight in raising up the low,
    And ruining the great.

    AND.                  Hence with my son,
    A captive am I hurried; noble birth
    Subject to these vicissitudes now sinks
    Into degrading slavery.

    HEC.                    Uncontrolled
    The power of fate: Cassandra from these arms
    But now with brutal violence was torn!

    AND. A second Ajax to thy daughter seems
    To have appeared. Yet hast thou other griefs.

    HEC. All bounds, all numbers they exceed; with ills
    Fresh ills as for pre-eminence contend.

    AND. Polyxena, thy daughter, at the tomb
    Of Peleus’ son hath breathed her last, a gift
    To the deceased.

    HEC.            Wretch that I am, alas!
    Too clearly now I understand the riddle
    Which in obscurer terms Talthybius uttered.

    AND. I saw her bleed, and lighting from this car
    Covered her with the decent shroud and wailed
    O’er her remains.

    HEC.              Alas! alas! my child
    To bloody altars dragged by impious hands,
    Alas! alas! how basely wert thou slain!

    AND. Most dreadfully she perished; yet her lot
    Who perished is more enviable than mine.

    HEC. Far different, O my daughter, is the state
    Of them who live, from them who breathe no more:
    For the deceased are nothing: but fair hope,
    While life remains, can never be extinct.

    AND. Thou whom, although I sprung not from thy womb,
    I deem a mother, to my cheering words
    With patience listen, they will yield delight
    To thy afflicted soul. ’Tis the same thing
    Ne’er to be born, or die; but better far
    To die, than to live wretched: for no sorrow
    Affects th’ unconscious tenant of the grave.
    But he who once was happy, he who falls
    From fortune’s summit down the vale of woe,
    With an afflicted spirit wanders o’er
    The scenes of past delight. In the cold grave,
    Like one who never saw the blessed sun,
    Polyxena remembers not her woes.
    But I who aimed the dextrous shaft, and gained
    An ample portion of renown, have missed
    The mark of happiness. In Hector’s house
    I acted as behoves each virtuous dame.
    First, whether sland’rous tongues assail or spare
    The matron’s chastity, an evil name,
    Her who remains not at her home, pursues:
    Such vain desires I therefore quelled, I stayed
    In my own chamber, a domestic life
    Preferring, and forbore to introduce
    Vain sentimental language, such as gains
    Too oft the ear of woman: ’twas enough
    For me to yield obedience to the voice
    Of virtue, that best monitor. My lord
    With placid aspect and a silent tongue
    I still received, for I that province knew
    In which I ought to rule, and when to yield
    Submission to a husband’s will. The fame
    This conduct gained me, reached the Grecian camp,
    And proved my ruin: for when I became
    A captive, Neoptolemus resolved
    To take me to his bed, and in the house
    Of murderers I to slavery am consigned.
    If shaking off my Hector’s loved remembrance
    To this new husband I my soul incline,
    I shall appear perfidious to the dead;
    Or, if I hate Achilles’ son, become
    Obnoxious to my lords; though some assert
    That one short night can reconcile th’ aversion
    Of any woman to the nuptial couch;
    I scorn that widow, reft of her first lord,
    Who listens to the voice of love, and weds
    Another. From her comrade torn, the mare
    Sustains the yoke reluctant, though a brute
    Dumb and irrational, by nature formed
    Subordinate to man: but I in thee
    Possessed a husband, O my dearest Hector,
    In wisdom, fortune, and illustrious birth,
    For me sufficient, great in martial deeds:
    A spotless virgin-bride, me from the house
    Of my great father, didst thou first receive;
    But thou art slain, and I to Greece must sail
    A captive, and endure the servile yoke!
    Is not the death of that Polyxena,
    Whom thou, O Hecuba, bewail’st, an ill
    More tolerable than those which I endure?
    For hope, who visits every wretch beside,
    To me ne’er comes; to me no promised joys
    Afford a flattering prospect to deceive
    This anxious bosom; for ’tis sweet to think
    E’en of ideal bliss.

    CHOR.                Thou art involved
    In the same sufferings, and in plaintive notes
    Bewailing thy calamity, inform’st me
    What treatment to expect.

    HEC.                      I ne’er did mount
    A ship, yet I from pictures and report
    These matters know: amidst a moderate storm,
    Such as they hope to weather out, the sailors
    To save themselves, exert a cheerful toil:
    This to the rudder, to the shattered sails
    That goes, a third laborious at the pump
    Draws off the rising waters; but if vanquished
    By the tempestuous ocean’s rage, they yield
    To fortune, and consigning to the waves
    Their vessel, are at random driven along.
    Thus I am mute beneath unnumbered woes,
    Nor can this tongue expatiate, for the gods
    Such torrents pour as drown my feeble voice!
    But, O my daughter, cease to name the fate
    Of slaughtered Hector, whom no tears can save.
    Pay due attention to thy present lord,
    With amorous glances and a fond compliance
    Receiving him; act thus, and thou wilt cheer
    Our friends, and this my grandson educate
    A bulwark to fallen Ilion, that his race
    The city may rebuild, and dwell in Troy.
    But a fresh topic of discourse ensues.
    What servant of the Greeks do I behold
    Again draw near, t’ announce some new design?

TALTHYBIUS, ANDROMACHE, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    TAL. O thou who erst wert Hector’s wife, that bravest
    Of Phrygians, hate me not; for with reluctance
    Will I the general sentence of the Greeks
    And Pelops’ progeny, announce.

    AND.                          What means
    This evil prelude.

    TAL.              ’Tis decreed thy son—
    How shall I speak it?

    AND.                  To a separate lord
    Shall be consigned?

    TAL.                None of the Grecian chiefs
    Shall ever o’er Astyanax bear rule.

    AND. Must I leave here, him who alone remains
    Of all that erst was dear to me in Troy?

    TAL. Alas! I know not in what terms t’ express
    The miseries that await thee?

    AND.                          I commend
    Such modesty, provided thou canst speak
    Aught to afford me comfort.

    TAL.                        They resolve
    To slay thy son; thou hear’st my dismal errand.

    AND. Ah me! thou hast unfolded to these ears
    An evil, greater than my menaced spousals.

    TAL. By his harangues to the assembled Greeks,
    Ulysses hath prevailed.

    AND.                    Alas! alas!
    Immoderate are the sorrows I endure.

    TAL. Saying they ought not to train up the son
    Of that heroic sire.

    AND.                May he obtain
    O’er his own children triumphs great as these!

    TAL. He from the towers of Ilion must be thrown:
    But I entreat thee, and thou hence shall seem
    More prudent, strive not to withhold thy son,
    But bear thy woes with firmness; nor, though weak,
    Deem thyself strong; for thou hast no support,
    And therefore must consider that thy city
    Is overthrown, thy husband is no more,
    Thou art reduced to servitude; and we
    Are strong enough to combat with one woman:
    O therefore brave not this unequal strife,
    Stoop not to aught that’s base, nor yet revile,
    Nor idly scatter curses on thy foes;
    For if thou utter aught that may provoke
    The anger of the host, thy son will bleed
    Unburied and unwept: but if thou bear
    With silence and composure thy misfortunes,
    Funereal honours shall adorn his grave,
    And Greece to thee her lenity extend.

    AND. Thee, O my dearest son, thy foes will slay;
    Soon art thou doomed to leave thy wretched mother.
    What saves the lives of others, the renown
    Of an illustrious sire, to thee will prove
    The cause of death: by this paternal fame
    Art thou attended in an evil hour.
    To me how luckless proved the genial bed,
    And those espousals, that to Hector’s house
    First brought me, when I trusted I should bear
    A son, no victim to the ruthless Greeks,
    But an illustrious Asiatic king.
    Weep’st thou, my son? dost thou perceive thy woes?
    Why cling to me with timid hands? Why seize
    My garment? thus beneath its mother’s wings
    The callow bird is sheltered. From the tomb,
    No Hector brandishing his massive spear
    Rushes to saves thee; no intrepid kinsman
    Of thy departed father, nor the might
    Of Phrygian hosts is here: but from aloof
    Borne headlong by a miserable leap,
    Shalt thou pour forth thy latest gasp of life
    Unpitied. Tender burden in the arms
    Of thy fond mother! what ambrosial odours
    Breathed from thy lips? I swathed thee to my breast
    In vain, I toiled in vain, and wore away
    My strength with fruitless labours. Yet embrace
    Thy mother once again; around my neck
    Entwine thine arms, and give one parting kiss.
    Ye Greeks, who studiously invent new modes
    Of unexampled cruelty, why slay
    This guiltless infant? Helen, O thou daughter
    Of Tyndarus, never didst thou spring from Jove,
    But I pronounce thee born of many sires,
    An evil Genius, Envy, Slaughter, Death,
    And every evil that from Earth receives
    Its nourishment; nor dare I to assert
    That Jove himself begot a pest like thee,
    Fatal to Greece and each barbarian chief.
    Perdition overtake thee! for those eyes
    By their seducing glances have o’erthrown
    The Phrygian empire. Bear this child away,
    And cast him from the turrets if ye list,
    Then banquet on his quivering flesh: the gods
    Ordain that I shall perish: nor from him
    Can I repel the stroke of death. Conceal
    This wretched form from public view, and plunge me
    In the ship’s hold; for I have lost my son,
    Such the blest prelude to my nuptial rite.

    CHOR. Thy myriads, hapless Ilion, did expire
    In combat for one woman, to maintain
    Paris’ accursed espousals.

    AND.                      Cease, my child,
    Fondly to lisp thy wretched mother’s name,
    Ascend the height of thy paternal towers,
    Whence ’tis by Greece decreed thy parting breath
    Shall issue. Take him hence. Aloud proclaim
    This deed ye merciless: that wretch alone
    Who never knew the blush of virtuous shame,
    Your sentence can applaud.

                      [_Exeunt_ ANDROMACHE _and_ TALTHYBIUS.

    HEC.                      O child, thou son
    Of my unhappy Hector, from thy mother
    And me thou unexpectedly art torn.
    What can I do, what help afford? for thee
    I smite this head, this miserable breast;
    Thus far my power extends. Alas! thou city,
    And, O my grandson! is there yet a curse
    Beyond what we have felt? remains there aught
    To save us from the yawning gulf of ruin?

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

              In Salamis’ profound retreat
          Famed for the luscious treasures of the bee,
              High raised above th’ encircling sea
          Thou, Telamon, didst fix thy regal seat;
              Near to those sacred hills, where spread
              The olive first its fragrant sprays,
          To form a garland for Minerva’s head,
              And the Athenian splendor raise:
          With the famed archer, with Alcmena’s son
          Thou cam’st exulting with vindictive joy;
          By your confederate arms was Ilion won,
        When from thy Greece thou cam’st our city to destroy.

    I. 2.

              Repining for the promised steeds,
          From Greece Alcides led a chosen band,
              With hostile prows th’ indented strand
          He reached, and anchored near fair Simois’ meads;
              Selected from each ship, he led
              Those who with dextrous hand could wing
          Th’ unerring shaft, till slaughter reached thy head,
              Laomedon, thou perjured king:
          Those battlements which Phœbus’ self did rear
          The victor wasted with devouring flame;
          Twice o’er Troy’s walls hath waved the hostile spear,
        Twice have insulting shouts announced Dardania’s shame.

    II. 1.

              Thou bear’st the sparkling wine in vain
          With step effeminate, O Phrygian boy,
              Erewhile didst thou approach with joy
          To fill the goblet of imperial Jove;
          For now thy Troy lies levelled with the plain,
          And its thick smoke ascends the realms above.
              On th’ echoing coast our plaints we vent,
          As feathered songsters o’er their young bewail,
              A child or husband these lament,
          And those behold their captive mothers sail:
          The founts where thou didst bathe, th’ athletic sports,
              Are now no more. Each blooming grace
          Sheds charms unheeded o’er thy placid face,
              And thou frequent’st Heaven’s splendid courts.
          Triumphant Greece hath levelled in the dust
        The throne where Priam ruled the virtuous and the just.

    II. 2.

              With happier auspices, O love.
          Erst didst thou hover o’er this fruitful plain,
              Hence caught the gods thy thrilling pain;
          By thee embellished, Troy’s resplendent towers
          Reared their proud summits blest by thundering Jove,
          For our allies were the celestial powers.
              But I no longer will betray
          Heaven’s ruler to reproach and biting shame.
              The white-winged morn, blest source of day,
          Who cheers the nations with her kindling flame,
          Beheld these walls demolished, and th’ abode
              Of that dear prince who shared her bed
          In fragments o’er the wasted champaign spread:
              While swift along the starry road,
          Her golden car his country’s guardian bore:
        False was each amorous god, and Ilion is no more.

MENELAUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    MEN. Hail, O ye solar beams, who on this day,
    When I my consort Helen shall regain
    Your radiance shed. For I am he who long
    Endured the toils of battle, Menelaus,
    Attended by the Grecian host. To Troy,
    Not in a woman’s cause, as many deem,
    I came, but came to punish him who broke
    The laws of hospitality, and ravished
    My consort from my palace. He hath suffered
    As he deserved, such was the will of Heaven,
    He and his country by the spear of Greece
    Have been destroyed. But I am come to bear
    That Spartan dame away, whom with regret
    I term my consort, though she once was mine.
    But she beneath these tents is with the rest
    Of Phrygia’s captives numbered: for the troops
    Whose arms redeemed her, have to me consigned
    That I might either take away, or spare
    Her life, and waft her to the Argive coast.
    I am resolved that Helen shall not bleed
    In Troy, but o’er the foaming waves to Greece
    Will I convey her, and to them whose friends
    Before yon walls were slain, surrender up
    To perish by their vengeance. But with speed
    Enter the tent, thence by that hair defiled
    With murder, O my followers, drag her forth,
    And hither bring: for when a prosperous breeze
    Arises, her will I to Greece convey.

    HEC. O thou who mov’st the world, and in this earth
    Hast fixed thy station, whosoe’er thou art,
    Impervious to our reason, whether thou,
    O Jove, art dread necessity which rules
    All nature, or that soul which animates
    The breasts of mortals, thee do I adore,
    For in a silent path thou tread’st and guid’st
    With justice the affairs of man.

    MEN.                            What means
    This innovation in the solemn prayer
    You to the gods address?

    HEC.                    I shall applaud
    The stroke, O Menelaus, if thou slay
    Thy wife; but soon as thou behold’st her, fly,
    Lest she with love ensnare thee. For the eyes
    Of men she captivates, o’erturns whole cities,
    And fires the roofs of lofty palaces,
    She is possessed of such resistless charms;
    Both I and thou and thousands to their cost,
    Alas! are sensible how great her power.

HELEN, MENELAUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    HEL. O Menelaus, this is sure a prelude
    To greater horrors. For with brutal hands
    I by your servants from these tents am dragged?
    Too well I know you hate me, yet would learn,
    How you and Greece have of my life disposed.

    MEN. Thou by the utmost rigour of the laws
    Hast not been sentenced; but the host, to me
    Whom thou hast wronged, consign thee to be slain.

    HEL. May not I answer to these harsh resolves,
    That if I bleed, unjustly shall I bleed?

    MEN. I came not hither to debate, but slay thee?

    HEC. Hear her, nor let her die, O Menelaus,
    Without this privilege. Me too allow
    To make reply to her defence; for nought
    Of the foul deeds, which she in Troy committed
    Yet know’st thou: if united, the whole tale
    Must force thee to destroy her, and preclude
    All means of her escaping.

    MEN.                      An indulgence
    Like this supposes leisure to attend;
    However, if she have a wish to speak,
    She may: but be assured, that my compliance
    To your request is owing, for such favour
    To her I would not grant.

    HEL.                      Perhaps with me
    Whom you account a foe, you will not deign,
    Whether I seem to utter truth or falsehood,
    To parley. But to each malignant charge
    With which, O Hecuba, I know thou com’st
    Prepared against me, will I make reply,
    And to o’erbalance all that thou canst urge
    Produce recriminations. First, she bore
    Paris, the author of these mischiefs, next
    Did aged Priam ruin Troy and me,
    When erst that infant he forbore to slay,
    That baleful semblance of a flaming torch!
    Hear what ensued; by Paris were the claims
    Of the three rival goddesses decided.
    The gift Minerva proffered; that commanding
    The Phrygians, he should conquer Greece; while Juno
    Promised, that he his empire should extend
    From Asia to remotest Europe’s bounds,
    If he to her adjudged the golden prize;
    But Venus, who in rapturous terms extolled
    My charms, engaged that as the great reward
    She would on him bestow me; to her beauty
    If o’er each goddess he the preference gave.
    Observe the sequel: Venus, o’er Minerva
    And Juno, gained the triumph; and my nuptials
    Thus far have been a benefit to Greece;
    Ye are not subject to barbarian lords,
    Crushed by invasion, or tyrannic power.
    But I my ruin owe to what my country
    Hath found thus advantageous, for my charms
    To Paris sold, and branded with disgrace,
    E’en for such deeds as merited a wreath
    To crown these brows. But you may urge, that all
    I have alleged is of no real weight,
    Because by stealth I from your palace fled.
    Accompanied by no mean goddess, came
    That evil genius, sprung from Hecuba,
    Distinguish him by either name you list,
    Paris or Alexander, in your house,
    Whom, O delirious, you behind you left,
    And sailed from Sparta to the Cretan isle.
    Well, be it so. Of my own heart, not you
    I in regard to all that hence ensued
    Will ask the question. What could have induced me,
    Following that stranger, to forsake my home,
    False to my native land? impute the guilt
    To Venus, and assume a power, beyond
    E’en that of Jove, who rules th’ inferior gods
    But yields to her behests. My crime was venial;
    Yet hence you may allege a specious charge
    Against me; since to earth’s dark vaults the corse
    Of Paris was consigned, no longer bound
    Through Heaven’s supreme decree in nuptial chains,
    I to the Grecian fleet should have escaped
    From Ilion’s palace; such was my design:
    This can the guards of Troy’s beleaguered towers,
    And sentinels who on the walls were stationed,
    Attest, that oft they caught me, as with ropes
    By stealth I strove to light upon the ground;
    But a new husband, fierce Deiphobus,
    Obtained me for a wife by brutal force,
    Though every Phrygian disapproved. What law
    Can sentence me, whom ’gainst my will he wedded,
    By you, my lord, with justice to be slain?
    But for the benefits through me derived
    To Greece, I in the stead of laureate wreaths
    With slavery am requited. If you wish
    To overcome the gods’ supreme behests,
    That very wish were folly.

    CHOR.                      O my Queen,
    Assert thy children’s and thy country’s cause,
    ’Gainst her persuasive language, for she speaks
    With eloquence, though guilty: curst imposture!

    HEC. I those three goddesses will first defend,
    And prove that she has uttered vile untruths:
    For of such madness ne’er can I suspect
    Juno and Pallas that immortal maid,
    As that the first should to barbarian tribes
    Propose to sell her Argos, or Minerva
    To make her Athens subject to the Phrygians:
    Seeking in sportive strife the palm of beauty
    They came to Ida’s mount. For through what motive
    Could Juno with such eagerness have wished
    Her charms might triumph? to obtain a husband
    Greater than Jove? could Pallas, who besought
    Her sire she ever might remain a virgin,
    Propose to wed some deity? Forbear
    To represent these goddesses as foolish,
    That thy transgressions may by their example
    Be justified: thou never canst persuade
    The wise. Thou hast presumed t’ assert (but this
    Was a ridiculous pretence) that Venus
    Came with my son to Menelaus’ house.
    Could she not calmly have abode in Heaven,
    Yet wafted thee and all Amycla’s city
    To Ilion? but the beauty of my son
    Was great, and thy own heart, when thou beheld’st him
    Became thy Venus: for whatever folly
    Prevails, is th’ Aphrodite of mankind:
    That of Love’s goddess, justly doth commence
    With the same letters as an idiot’s name.
    Him didst thou see in a barbaric vest
    With gold refulgent, and thy wanton heart
    Was thence inflamed with love, for thou wert poor
    While yet thou didst reside in Greece; but leaving
    The Spartan regions, thou didst hope, the city
    Of Troy, with gold o’erflowing, could support
    Thy prodigality; for the revenues
    Of Menelaus far too scanty proved
    For thy luxuriant appetites: but sayst thou
    That Paris bore thee thence by force? what Spartan
    Saw this? or, with what cries didst thou invoke
    Castor or Pollux, thy immortal brothers,
    Who yet on earth remained, nor had ascended
    The starry height? But since thou cam’st to Troy,
    And hither the confederate troops of Greece
    Tracing thy steps, began the bloody strife,
    Whene’er thou heard’st that Menelaus prospered
    Him didst thou praise, and make my son to grieve
    That such a mighty rival shared thy love:
    But if the Trojan army proved victorious,
    He shrunk into a thing of nought. On Fortune
    Still didst thou look, still deaf to Virtue’s call
    Follow her banners: yet dost thou assert
    That thou by cords hast from the lofty towers
    In secrecy attempted to descend,
    As if thou here hadst been constrained to stay?
    Where then wert thou surprised, or sharpened sword,
    Or ropes preparing, as each generous dame
    Who sought her former husband would have done?
    Oft have I counselled thee in many words:
    “Depart, O daughter, that my sons may take
    Brides less obnoxious: thee aboard the ships
    Of Greece, assisting in thy secret flight,
    Will I convey. O end the war ’twixt Greece
    And Ilion.” But to thee was such advice
    Unwelcome; for with pride thou in the house
    Of Paris didst behave thyself, and claim
    The adoration of barbaric tribes,
    For this was thy great object. But e’en now
    Thy charms displaying, clad in gorgeous vest
    Dost thou go forth, still daring to behold
    That canopy of Heaven which o’erhangs
    Thy injured husband; thou detested woman!
    Whom it had suited, if in tattered vest
    Shivering, with tresses shorn, in Scythian guise
    Thou hadst appeared, and for transgressions past
    Deep smitten with remorse, assumed the blush
    Of virtuous matrons, not that frontless air.
    O Menelaus! I will now conclude;
    By slaying her, prepare for Greece the wreaths
    It merits, and extend to the whole sex
    This law, that every woman who betrays
    Her lord shall die.

    CHOR.              As that illustrious stem
    Whence thou deriv’st thy birth, and as thy rank
    Demand, on thy adulterous wife inflict
    Just punishment, and purge this foul reproach,
    This instance of a woman’s lust, from Greece:
    So shall thy very enemies perceive
    Thou art magnanimous.

    MEN.                  Your thoughts concur
    With mine, that she a willing fugitive
    My palace left and sought a foreign bed;
    But speaks of Venus merely to disguise
    Her infamy!—Away! thou shalt be stoned,
    And in one instant for the tedious woes
    Of Greece make full atonement; I will teach thee
    That thou didst shame me in an evil hour.

    HEL. I by those knees entreat you, O forbear
    To slay me, that distraction sent by Heaven
    To me imputing: but forgive me.

    HEC.                            Wrong not
    Thy partners in the war, whom she hath slain;
    In theirs, and in my children’s cause, I sue.

    MEN. Desist, thou hoary matron: her entreaties
    Move not this steadfast bosom. O my followers
    Attend her, I command you, to the ships
    Which shall convey her hence.

    HEC.                          Let her not enter
    Thy ship.

    MEN.      Is she grown heavier than before?

    HEC. He never loved who doth not always love,
    Howe’er the inclinations of the dame
    He loves may fluctuate.

    MEN.                    All shall be performed
    According to thy wish; she shall not enter
    My bark: for thou hast uttered wholesome counsels:
    But soon as she in Argos’ lands, with shame,
    As she deserves, shall she be slain, and warn
    All women to be chaste. No easy task:
    Yet shall her ruin startle every child
    Of folly, though more vicious still than Helen.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

              E’en thus by too severe a doom,
              To Greece, O Jove, hast thou betrayed
          Our shrines, our altars, dropping rich perfume,
          The lambent flame that round the victims played,
              Myrrh’s odorous smoke that mounts the skies,
          Yon holy citadel, with Ida’s grove
          Around whose oaks the clasping ivy plies,
              Where rivulets meandering rove
          Cold and translucent from the drifted snows;
              On that high ridge with orient blaze
          The sun first scatters his enlivening rays,
        And with celestial flame th’ ecstatic priestess glows.

    I. 2.

              Each sacrifice, each pious rite,
              Hence vanished, with th’ harmonious choirs
          Whose accents soothed the languid ear of night,
          While to the gods we waked our sounding lyres;
              Their golden images no more
          Twelve times each year, on that revolving eve
          When shines the full-orbed moon, do we adore.
              Harassed by anxious fears, I grieve,
          Oft thinking whether thou, O Jove, wilt deign
              To listen to our piteous moan,
          High as thou sitt’st on thy celestial throne;
        For Troy, by fire consumed, lies level with the plain.

    II. 1.

          Thou, O my husband, roam’st a flitting shade,
          To thee are all funereal rites denied,
              To thee no lustral drops supplied:
          But I by the swift bark shall be conveyed
              Where Argos’ cloud-capped fortress stands,
          Erected by the Cyclops’ skilful hands.
          Before our doors assembling children groan,
              And oft repeat with clamorous moan
          A mother’s name. Alone shall I be borne
          Far from thy sight, by the victorious host
              Of Greece, and leaving Ilion’s coast,
          O’er ocean’s azure billows sail forlorn,
          Either to Salamis, that sacred land,
          Or where the Isthmian summit o’er two seas
          A wide extended prospect doth command,
        Seated in Pelops’ straits where Greece the prize decrees.

    II. 2.

          Its arduous voyage more than half complete,
          In the Ægean deep, and near the land,
              May the red lightning by Jove’s hand
          Winged from the skies with tenfold ruin, meet
              The bark that wafts me o’er the wave
          From Troy to Greece a miserable slave.
          Before the golden mirror wont to braid
              Her tresses, like a sportive maid,
          May Helen never reach the Spartan shore,
          Those household gods to whom she proved untrue,
              Nor her paternal mansions view,
          Enter the streets of Pitane no more,
          Nor Pallas’ temple with its brazen gate;
          Because her nuptials teemed with foul disgrace
          To mighty Greece through each confederate state;
        And hence on Simois’ banks were slain Troy’s guiltless race.

          But ha! on this devoted realm are hurled
          Successive woes. Ye hapless Phrygian dames,
          Behold the slain Astyanax, whom Greece
          With rage inhuman from yon towers hath thrown.

TALTHYBIUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

_The Body of_ ASTYANAX _borne in upon a Shield_.

    TAL. O Hecuba, one ship is left behind
    To carry the remainder of the spoils
    Which to Achilles’ son have been adjudged,
    To Phthia’s coast. For Neoptolemus,
    Hearing that recent evils hath befall’n
    His grandsire Peleus, and that Pelias’ son
    Acastus hath expelled him from his realm,
    Already hath departed with such speed
    As would admit of no delay: with him
    Andromache is gone, for whom I shed
    A stream of tears, when from the land she went
    Wailing her country, and to Hector’s tomb
    Her plaints addressing: the victorious chief
    Hath she entreated, to allow the corse
    Of your unhappy Hector’s son, who perished
    From Ilion’s ramparts thrown, to be interred,
    Nor bear this shield, the terror of the Greeks,
    With brass refulgent, which his father placed
    Before his flank in battle, to the house
    Of Peleus; nor to that ill-omened chamber
    Where spousals dire on her arrival wait
    The mother of the slain; for such an object
    Must grieve her to behold: but in the stead
    Of cedar and the monumental stone,
    Bury the child in this: for she the corse
    Hath to your arms consigned, that you may grace it
    With many a fragrant garland, and with vests
    Such as your present fortunes will afford.
    For she has sailed, and through his haste her lord
    Prevented her from lodging in the grave
    Her son. While thus you his remains adorn
    We will mark out the spot, and with our spears
    Dig up the ground. Without delay perform
    These duties: I one task to you most irksome
    Have rendered needless: for I laved the body,
    And cleansed the wounds as o’er Scamander’s stream
    I passed. But to prepare for the deceased
    A tomb, I go, that with united toil
    When this we have accomplished, they may steer
    Our vessel homeward.

                                         [_Exit_ TALTHYBIUS.

    HEC.                Place that orbed shield
    Of Hector on the ground, a spectacle
    Most piteous, and unwelcome to these eyes.
    How, O ye Greeks, whose abject souls belie
    Your brave achievements, trembling at a child,
    Could ye commit this unexampled murder,
    Lest at some future time he should rebuild
    The walls of Ilion? Ye inhuman cowards!
    Our ruin from that fatal hour we date
    When Hector with unnumbered heroes fell.
    But having sacked our city, and destroyed
    Each Phrygian warrior, feared ye such an infant
    The dastard I abhor who meanly shrinks
    Through groundless panic. O for ever loved,
    By what a piteous fate didst thou expire!
    Hadst thou, the champion of thy country, died,
    In riper years, when married, and endued
    With power scarce second to th’ immortal gods,
    Thou hadst been blest, if aught on earth deserves
    The name of bliss. But thou, my son, beheld’st
    And hadst a distant knowledge of these joys,
    Which thou didst ne’er experience: for to thee
    The treasures which the palaces of Troy
    Contained, proved useless. O unhappy youth,
    How wert thou hurled from thy paternal walls
    Reared by Apollo’s hand; and through those ringlets,
    Which oft thy mother smoothed and kissed, the gore
    Bursts from thy fractured skull: but let me waive
    So horrid a description. O ye hands,
    How in your fingers do ye still retain
    A pleasing sad remembrance of your sire,
    Or why do ye lie motionless before me?
    Dear mouth, full many a babbling accent wont
    To utter, art thou closed by death? Thy voice
    Deceived me erst, when clinging to these garments,
    “O mother,” oft didst thou exclaim, “the hair
    Shorn from my brows to thee I will devote,
    Lead round thy tomb my comrades, and address
    Thy hovering ghost in many a plaintive strain.”
    Now not to me, alas! dost thou perform
    These duteous offices, but I, bowed down
    With age, an exile, of my children reft,
    Must bury the disfigured corse of thee
    A tender infant. These unnumbered kisses,
    My cares in nurturing thee, and broken sleep,
    Proved fruitless. What inscription can the bard
    Place o’er thy sepulchre? “The Greeks who feared
    This infant, slew him!” Such an epitaph
    Would shame them. As for thee who hast obtained
    Nought of thy wealth paternal, yet this shield
    In which thou shalt be buried will be thine.
    O brazen orb, which erst wert wont to guard
    The nervous arm of Hector, thou hast lost
    Thy best possessor: in thy concave circle
    How is that hero’s shape impressed; it bears
    Marks of that sweat which dropped from Hector’s brow,
    Wearied with toil, when ’gainst thy edge he leaned
    His cheek. Hence carry, to adorn the corse,
    Whate’er our present station will afford,
    For such the fortunes which Jove grants us now
    As splendour suits not: yet accept these gifts
    Out of the little I possess. An idiot
    Is he, who thinking himself blest, exults
    As if his joys were stable: like a man
    Smitten with frenzy, changeful fortune bounds
    Inconstant in her course, now here, now there,
    Nor is there any one who leads a life
    Of bliss uninterrupted.

    CHOR.                  All is ready:
    For from the spoils yon Phrygian matrons bear
    Trappings to grace the dead.

    HEC.                        On thee, my son,
    Not as a victor who with rapid steeds
    Didst ever reach the goal, or wing the shaft
    With surer aim, an exercise revered
    By each unwearied Phrygian youth, thy grandame
    Places these ornaments which erst were thine:
    But now hath Helen, by the gods abhorred,
    Stripped thee of all thou didst possess, and caused
    Thy murder, and the ruin of our house.

    CHOR. Alas! thou hast transpierced my inmost soul,
    O thou, whom I expected to have seen
    Troy’s mighty ruler.

    HEC.                But I now enwrap
    Thy body with the vest thou shouldst have worn
    At Hymen’s festive rites, in wedlock joined
    With Asia’s noblest princess. But, O source
    Of triumphs numberless, dear shield of Hector,
    Accept these laureate wreaths: for though by death
    Thou canst not be affected, thou shalt lie
    Joined with this corse in death; since thou deserv’st
    More honourable treatment, than the arms
    Of crafty and malignant Ithacus.

    CHOR. Thee, much lamented youth, shall earth receive.
    Now groan, thou wretched mother.

    HEC.                            Oh!

    CHOR.                                Commence
    Those wailings which are uttered o’er the dead.

    HEC. Ah me!

    CHOR.      Alas! too grievous are thy woes
    To be endured.

    HEC.          These fillets o’er thy wounds
    I bind, and exercise the healing art
    In name and semblance only, but, alas!
    Not in reality. Whate’er remains
    Unfinished, ’mid the shades beneath, to thee
    With tender care thy father will supply.

    CHOR. Smite with thy hand thy miserable head
    Till it resound. Alas!

    HEC.                  My dearest comrades.

    CHOR. Speak to thy friends; O Hecuba, what plaints
    Hast thou to utter?

    HEC.                Nought but woe for me
    Was by the gods reserved; beyond all cities
    To them hath Troy been odious. We in vain
    Have offered sacrifice. But had not Jove
    O’erthrown and plunged us in the shades beneath,
    We had remained obscure, we by the Muse
    Had ne’er been sung, nor ever furnished themes
    To future bards. But for this hapless youth
    Go and prepare a grave; for the deceased
    Is with funereal wreaths already crowned:
    Although these pomps, I deem, are to the dead
    Of little consequence; an empty pride
    They in the living serve but to display.

    CHOR. Thy wretched mother on thy vital thread
    Had stretched forth mighty hopes: though styled most happy
    From thy illustrious birth, thou by a death
    Most horrid didst expire.

    HEC.                      Ha! who are these
    Whom I behold, in their victorious hands
    Waving those torches o’er the roofs of Troy?
    E’en now o’er Ilion some fresh woes impend.

TALTHYBIUS, HECUBA, CHORUS.

    TAL. To you I speak, O leaders of the troops
    Who are ordained to burn this town of Priam.
    No longer in your hands without effect
    Reserve those blazing torches: but hurl flames
    On this devoted city, for when Troy
    Is utterly demolished, we shall leave
    Its hated shores, exulting. But to you,
    O Phrygians, I the same behests address;
    When the shrill trumpet of our chief resounds,
    Ye to the Grecian navy must repair
    And from these regions sail. But as for thee,
    Thou aged and most miserable dame,
    Follow their steps who from Ulysses come.
    To whom thy fate consigns thee for a slave
    Far from thy country in a foreign land.

    HEC. Ah, wretched me! this surely is the last,
    The dire completion this, of all my woes.
    I leave my country: Ilion’s bulwarks flame.
    Yet, O decrepit feet, with painful haste
    Bear me along, that I may bid adieu
    To my unhappy city. Thou, O Troy,
    Distinguished erst among barbarian tribes
    By thy superior prowess, soon shalt lose
    The most illustrious name thou didst acquire:
    Thee will the flames consume, and us our foes
    Drag from our home to slavery. O ye gods!
    Upon the gods yet wherefore should I call?
    For when we erst invoked them oft, they heard not.
    Come on, and let us rush amid the flames:
    For in the ruins of my blazing country
    ’Twill be to me most glorious to expire.

    TAL. Thy griefs, O wretched woman, make thee frantic.
    But lead her hence, neglect not. For Ulysses
    Obtained this prize, and she to him must go.

    HEC. O dread Saturnian king, from whom the Phrygians
    Derive their origin, dost thou behold
    Our sufferings, most unworthy of the race
    Of Dardanus?

    CHOR.        He surely doth behold:
    But this great city, city now no more,
    Is ruined: nought remains of Troy.

    HEC.                              The blaze
    Of Ilion glares, the fire hath caught the roofs,
    The streets of Pergamus, and crashing towers.

    CHOR. As the light smoke on rapid wing ascends
    To heaven, how swiftly vanishes fallen Troy!
    Torrents of flame have laid the palace waste,
    And o’er its summit waves the hostile spear.

    HEC. O fostering soil, that gave my children birth.

    CHOR. Alas! alas!

    HEC.              Yet hear me, O my sons,
    Your mother’s voice distinguish.

    CHOR.                            With loud plaints
    Thou call’st upon the dead, those aged limbs
    Stretched on the ground, and scraping up the dust
    With either hand. I follow thy example
    Kneeling on earth’s cold bosom, and invoke
    My wretched husband in the shades beneath.

    HEC. We forcibly are borne——

    CHOR.                          Most doleful sound!

    HEC. To servile roofs.

    CHOR.                  From my dear native land.

    HEC. Slain, uninterred, abandoned by thy friends,
    Thou sure, O Priam, know’st not what I suffer.
    For sable death hath closed thine eyes for ever;
    Though pious, thou by impious hands wert murdered.
    O ye polluted temples of the gods,
    And thou my dearest city.

    CHOR.                    Ye, alas!
    Are by the deadly flame and pointed spear
    Now occupied, on this beloved soil
    Soon shall you lie a heap of nameless ruins:
    For dust, which mixed with smoke, to Heaven ascends,
    No longer will permit me to discern
    Where erst my habitation stood: the land
    Loses its very name, and each memorial
    Of pristine grandeur; wretched Troy’s no more.

    HEC. Ye know the fatal truth, ye heard the crash
    Of falling towers. Our city to its basis
    Is shaken. O ye trembling, trembling limbs,
    Support my steps!

    TAL.              Depart to end thy days
    In servitude. Alas! thou wretched city!
    Yet to the navy of the Greeks proceed.




THE CYCLOPS.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    SILENUS.
    CHORUS OF SATYRS.
    ULYSSES.
    POLYPHEME THE CYCLOPS.


SCENE.—THE MOUNTAIN OF ÆTNA IN SICILY.

SILENUS.

    O Bacchus, for thy sake have I endured
    Unnumbered toils, both at the present hour,
    And when these nerves by vigorous youth were strung:
    By Juno first with wild distraction fired,
    Thou didst forsake the mountain nymphs whose care
    Nurtured thy infancy. Next in that war
    With the gigantic progeny of earth,
    Stationed beside thee to sustain thy shield,
    Piercing the buckler of Enceladus,
    I slew him with my lance. Is this a dream?
    By Jove it is not: for I showed his spoils
    To Bacchus, and the labours I endure
    At present, are so great that they exceed
    E’en those. For since ’gainst thee Saturnia roused,
    To bear thee far away, Etruria’s race
    Of impious pirates, I soon caught th’ alarm,
    And sailed in quest of thee with all my children:
    Myself the stern ascended, to direct
    The rudder, and each satyr plied an oar
    Till ocean’s azure surface with white foam
    Was covered; thee, O mighty King, they sought.
    Near Malea’s harbour as the vessel rode,
    An eastern blast arose, and to this rock
    Of Ætna, drove us, where the sons of Neptune,
    The one-eyed Cyclops, drenched with human gore,
    Inhabit desert caves; by one of these
    Were we made captives, and beneath his roof
    To slavery are reduced. Our master’s name
    Is Polypheme; instead of Bacchus’ orgies
    We tend the flocks of an accursed Cyclops.
    My blooming sons, on yonder distant cliffs,
    Feed the young lambs; while I at home am stationed
    The goblet to replenish, and to scrape
    The rugged floor; to this unholy lord,
    A minister of impious festivals:
    And now must I perform the task assigned
    Of cleansing with this rake the filthy ground,
    So shall the cave be fit for his reception,
    When with his flocks my absent lord returns.
    But I already see my sons approach,
    Their fleecy charge conducting. Ha! what means
    This uproar? would ye now renew the dance
    Of the Sicinnides, as when ye formed
    The train of amorous Bacchus, and assembled,
    Charmed by the lute, before Althæa’s gate?

CHORUS, SILENUS.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

        Sprung from an untainted race,
        Hardy father of the fold,
        Why, bounding o’er that craggy space,
        Roam’st thou desperately bold,
        Far from the refreshing gale,
        The verdant herbage of the mead,
        And sloping channel wont to feed
        Thy trough with springs that never fail?
        Yon caves with bleating lambkins ring,
        Come, depasture with the flock;
        Leave, O leave the dewy rock,
        Ere this ponderous stone I fling.
        Thee with speeding horns I call
        To the Cyclops’ lofty stall.

    II.

        Thou too those swollen udders yield,
        That thy young ones may be fed,
        Who, while thou browsest o’er the field,
        Lie neglected in the shed;
        Slumbering all the livelong day
        At length with clamorous plaints they wake,
        Thou t’ appease them wilt forsake
        Ætna’s valleys ever gay.
        Young Bromius and his jocund rout
        Here their orgies ne’er repeat,
        No thyrsus waves, no drums they beat;
        Where the gurgling currents spout,
        Here no vineyards yield delight,
        Nor sport the nymphs on Nyssa’s height.

    III.

        Yet here I chaunt the strains which Bacchus taught,
              To that Venus whom I sought
              When with the Mænades I ranged.
              Where, gentle Evan, dost thou tread
        Alone, and from thy comrades far estranged,
        Those auburn ringlets floating from thy head?
        Thy votary once, but now a slave
        To yonder one-eyed Cyclops, I abide
                In this detested cave:
              Covered with a goat’s vile hide,
              Thy friend, alas! exposed to scorn
              Wanders helpless and forlorn.

    SIL. My sons, be silent: bid your followers drive
    Their flocks into the stony cave.

    CHOR.                            Proceed.
    But wherefore, O my father, in this haste?

    SIL. A Grecian vessel, stranded on the coast,
    I see, and to this cave the mariners
    Attend their leader, on their heads they bear
    Those empty vessels which express they want
    Provisions, with fresh water too their urns
    Would they replenish. O unhappy strangers!
    Who are they? unapprised what lord here rules,
    Dread Polypheme, they in an evil hour
    Are entering this inhospitable threshold,
    And rushing headlong e’en into the jaws
    Of this fierce Cyclops, gorged with human flesh.
    But interrupt me not; I will inquire
    Whence to Sicilian Ætna’s mount they came.

ULYSSES, SILENUS, CHORUS.

    ULY. Can ye direct me, strangers, where to find
    Fresh springs to slake our thirst; or who will sell
    Food to the hungry sailor? But what means
    That group of satyrs, whom before yon cave
    I see assembled? we at Bacchus’ city
    Seem to have landed. Thee, the elder-born,
    Thee first I hail.

    SIL.              Hail! foreigner; acquaint us
    Both who you are, and from what realm you came.

    ULY. Ulysses, king of Ithaca, and th’ isle
    Of Cephalenè.

    SIL.          That loquacious man,
    The crafty brood of Sisyphus, full well
    I know.

    ULY.    Reproach me not, for I am he.

    SIL. Whence sailed you to Sicilia?

    ULY.                              From the shores
    Of blazing Ilion, from the war of Troy.

    SIL. What, knew you not the way to your own country?

    ULY. The tempests violently drove me hither.

    SIL. By Heaven, your fortunes are the same with mine.

    ULY. What cam’st thou hither too against thy will?

    SIL. Yes, in pursuit of those accursed pirates
    Who seized on Bromius.

    ULY.                  But what land is this,
    And by what men inhabitated?

    SIL.                        This mountain,
    Called Ætna, overlooks Sicilia’s plains.

    ULY. Where are the fortresses and lofty towers
    Which guard its peopled cities?

    SIL.                            They exist not.
    No men, O stranger, on these summits dwell.

    ULY. But who possess the land, a savage race
    Of beasts?

    SIL.      The Cyclops occupy these caves,
    They have no houses.

    ULY.                Governed by what chief?
    Is this a mere democracy?

    SIL.                      They lead
    The life of shepherds, and in no respect
    Yield to each other.

    ULY.                Do they sow the grain
    Of Ceres, or on what do they subsist?

    SIL. On milk, on cheese, and on their sheep, they feed.

    ULY. Affords the vine, nectareous juice, the drink
    Bacchus invented?

    SIL.              No such thing: they dwell
    In an ungrateful soil.

    ULY.                  But do they practise
    The rites of hospitality, and hold
    The stranger sacred?

    SIL.                They aver the flesh
    Of strangers is a most delicious food.

    ULY. What saidst thou, banquet they on human flesh?

    SIL. Here no man lands who is not doomed to bleed.

    ULY. Where is this Cyclops, in the cave?

    SIL.                                  He went
    To Ætna’s summit, with his hounds to trace
    The savage beasts.

    ULY.              But know’st thou by what means
    We from this region may escape?

    SIL.                            I know not.
    But, O Ulysses, I’ll do everything
    To serve you.

    ULY.          Sell us bread, supply our want.

    SIL. I told you we have nothing here but flesh.

    ULY. By this, sharp hunger, which makes all things sweet,
    May be assuaged.

    SIL.            Cheese from the press, and milk
    Of heifers too.

    ULY.            Produce them: while the day
    Yet lasts, should we conclude our merchandise.

    SIL. With how much gold will you repay me? Speak.

    ULY. No gold I bring, but Bacchus’ cheering juice.

    SIL. My dearest friend, you mention what we long
    Have stood in need of.

    ULY.                  This enchanting liquor
    Did Maron, offspring of the courteous god,
    On us bestow.

    SIL.          Whom erst, while yet a boy
    I in these arms sustained.

    ULY.                      The son of Bacchus,
    T’ inform thee more minutely who he is.

    SIL. Aboard the ship, or have you hither brought it?

    ULY. Here is the cask, old man, which thou perceiv’st
    Contains the wine.

    SIL.              It hardly is a sup.

    ULY. But we have twice as much as this will yield.

    SIL. A most delicious spring is that you named.

    ULY. Shall I first treat thee with some wine unmixed,
    That thou may’st taste?

    SIL.                    Well judged: this specimen
    Soon will induce me to conclude the purchase.

    ULY. A cup too I have brought as well as cask.

    SIL. Pour forth, that I may drink, and recollect
    The grateful taste of wine.

    ULY.                        Look there!

    SIL.                                    Ye gods!
    How beauteous is its odour!

    ULY.                        Hast thou seen it?

    SIL. By Jove I have not, but I smell its charms.

    ULY. Taste, nor to words alone confine thy praise.

    SIL. Ha! ha! now Bacchus to the choral dance
    Invites me.

    ULY.        Hath it moistened well thy palate?

    SIL. So well as e’en to reach my fingers’ ends.

    ULY. Beside all this, shall money too be thine.

    SIL. Empty the vessel, and reserve your gold.

    ULY. Bring forth the cheese and lambs.

    SIL.                                That will I do,
    Regardless of my lord, because I wish
    To drain one goblet of this wine, and give
    The flocks of all the Cyclops in its stead.
    I’d from Leucadè, when completely drunk,
    Into the ocean take a lover’s leap,
    Shutting my eyes. For he who, when he quaffs
    The mantling bowl, exults not, is a madman.
    Through wine new joys our wanton bosoms fire,
    With eager arms we clasp the yielding fair,
    And in the giddy dance forget each ill
    That heretofore assailed us. So I kiss
    The rich potation; let the stupid Cyclops
    Weep with that central eye which in his front
    Glares horribly.

                                            [_Exit_ SILENUS.

    CHOR.            Attend: for we must hold
    A long confabulation, O Ulysses.

    ULY. We meet each other like old friends.

    CHOR.                                    Was Troy
    By you subdued? was Helen taken captive?

    ULY. And the whole house of Priam we laid waste.

    CHOR. When ye had seized on that transcendent fair,
    Did ye then all enjoy her in your turn,
    Because she loves variety of husbands?
    False to her vows, when she the painted greaves
    Around the legs of Paris, on his neck
    The golden chain, beheld, with love deep smitten
    From Menelaus, best of men, she fled.
    Ah! would to Heaven no women had been born
    But such as were reserved for my embraces.

SILENUS _returning_, ULYSSES, CHORUS.

    SIL. Here, King Ulysses, is the shepherd’s food:
    Banquet on bleating lambs, and bear away
    As many curdled cheeses as you can;
    But from these caverns with your utmost speed
    Depart, when ye have given me in return
    The clustering vine’s rich juice which Bacchus loves.

    ULY. The Cyclops comes. What shall we do? Old man,
    We are undone. Ah, whither can we fly?

    SIL. Ye may conceal yourselves beneath that rock.

    ULY. Most dangerous is the scheme thou hast proposed,
    To rush into the toils.

    SIL.                    No danger truly;
    For in this rock is many a hiding-place.

    ULY. Not thus: indignant Troy might groan indeed
    If from a single arm we basely fled.
    Oft with my shield against a countless band
    Of Phrygians have I fought. If we must die,
    Let us die nobly: or with life maintain
    The fame we erst in dubious fields acquired.

POLPYHEME, SILENUS, CHORUS, ULYSSES.

    POL. What mean these transports, this insensate uproar,
    These Bacchanalian orgies? Nyssa’s god,
    The brazen timbrel, and the rattling drum,
    Are distant from these regions. In the cave
    How fare the new-yeaned lambkins? do they suck,
    Or follow they the ewes? have ye prepared
    In wicker vats the cheeses? No reply?
    This club shall make ye weep forthwith. Look up,
    Not on the ground.

    CHOR.              We lift our dazzled eyes
    To Jove himself; I view the twinkling stars
    And bright Orion.

    POL.              Is my dinner ready?

    CHOR. It is. Prepare your jaws for mastication.

    POL. Are the bowls filled with milk?

    CHOR.                                They overflow,
    And you may drink whole hogsheads if you will.

    POL. Of sheep, or cows, or mixed?

    CHOR.                            Whate’er you please;
    But swallow not me too.

    POL.                    No certainly;
    For ye would foot it in my tortured paunch,
    And kill me with those antics. But what crowd
    Behold I in the stalls? Some thieves or pirates
    Are landed: at the mouth of yonder cave
    The lambs are bound with osiers, on the floor
    The cheese-press scattered lies, and the bald head
    Of this old man is swoll’n with many bruises.

    SIL. Ah me! into a fever I am beaten.

    POL. By whom, old man, who smote thy hoary head?

    SIL. O Cyclops, by these ruffians whom I hindered
    From carrying off their plunder.

    POL.                            Know they not
    I am a god sprung from the blest immortals?

    SIL. All this I told them, yet they seized your goods,
    Eat up your cheese without my leave, dragged forth
    The lambs, declared they would exhibit you
    In a huge collar of three cubits long,
    Closely imprisoned, and before that eye,
    Which in the centre of your forehead glares,
    Bore out your entrails, soundly scourge your hide,
    Then throw you into their swift vessel’s hold
    Tied hand and foot, and sell you, with a lever
    To heave up ponderous stones, or to the ground
    Level some door.

    POL.            Indeed! go whet the knives
    Without delay, collect a mighty pile
    Of wood, and light it up with flaming brands,
    They shall be slain immediately, and broiled
    To satisfy my appetite with viands
    Hot from the coals. The rest shall be well sodden;
    For I am sated with unsavoury beasts,
    Enough on lions have I banqueted
    And stags that haunt this mountain: but ’tis long
    Since human flesh I tasted.

    SIL.                        My dread lord,
    Variety is sweet: no other strangers
    Have reached of late these solitary caves.

    ULY. O Cyclops, hear the strangers also speak,
    In their defence. We, wanting to buy food,
    Came to your caverns from our anchored bark.
    These lambs to us he bartered for our wine,
    And of his own accord, when he had drank,
    Yielded them up; no violence was used:
    But the account he gives is utter falsehood,
    Since he was caught without your privity
    Vending your goods.

    SIL.                I? curses on your head!

    ULY. If I have uttered an untruth.

    SIL.                              By Neptune
    Your sire, O Cyclops, by great Triton, Nereus,
    Calypso, Nereus’ daughters, by the waves,
    And all the race of fishes, I protest,
    Most beauteous Cyclops, my dear little lord,
    I sold not to the foreigners your goods;
    May swift perdition, if I did, o’ertake
    These sinners here, my children, whom I love
    Beyond expression.

    CHOR.              Curb thy tongue: I saw thee
    Vending thy lord’s possessions to the strangers:
    If I speak falsehood, may our father perish!
    But injure not these foreigners.

    POL.                            Ye lie;
    For I in him much rather would confide
    Than Rhadamanthus, and pronounce that he
    Is a more upright judge. But I to them
    Some questions would propose. Whence sailed, strangers?
    Where is your country and your native town?

    ULY. We in the realms of Ithaca were born;
    But after we had laid Troy’s bulwarks waste,
    O Cyclops, by those howling winds which raise
    The ocean’s boisterous surges, to your coast
    Our vessel was impelled.

    POL.                    Are ye the men
    Who worthless Helen’s ravisher pursued
    To Ilion’s turrets on Scamander’s bank?

    ULY. The same: most dreadful toils have we endured.

    POL. Dishonourable warfare; in the cause
    Of one vile woman ye to Phrygia sailed.

    ULY. Such was the will of Jove; on no man charge
    The fault. But we to you, O generous son
    Of ocean’s god, our earnest prayers address,
    Nor fear with honest freedom to remonstrate
    That we your hapless friends, who to these caves
    For refuge fly, deserve not to be slain
    To satiate with accursed human food
    Your appetite: for to your sire, great king,
    Full many a temple on the shores of Greece
    Have we erected; Tænarus’ sacred haven
    To him remains inviolate, the cliff
    Of Malea, Sunium for its silver mines
    Renowned, on whose steep promontory stands
    Minerva’s fane, and the Gerastian bay.
    But those intolerable wrongs which Greece
    From Troy had suffered, could we not forgive.
    Our triumph interests you, who in a land
    With Greece connected, dwell, beneath the rock
    Of flaming Ætna. Let those public laws
    Which all mankind obey, on you prevail
    To change your ruthless purpose, and admit
    Your suppliants to a conference, who have long
    Endured the perils of the billowy deep;
    With hospitable gifts, and change of raiment
    Assist us, nor affix our quivering limbs
    On spits, to sate your gluttony. Enough
    Hath Priam’s land depopulated Greece,
    Whole myriads have in fighting fields been slain;
    The widowed bride, the aged childless matron,
    And hoary sire, hath Troy made ever wretched.
    But if you burn, and at your hateful feasts
    Devour the scattered relics of our host,
    Whither shall any Grecian turn? but listen
    To my persuasion, Cyclops, and control
    Your gluttony. What piety enjoins,
    Prefer to this defiance of the gods:
    For ruin oft attends unrighteous gain.

    SIL. Leave not the smallest morsel of his flesh;
    Take my advice, and if you eat his tongue,
    You certainly, O Cyclops, will become
    A most accomplished orator.

    POL.                        Vile caitiff,
    Wealth is the deity the wise adore,
    But all things else are unsubstantial boasts,
    And specious words alone. I nought regard
    Those promontories sacred to my sire.
    Why dost thou talk of them? I tremble not,
    O stranger, at the thunderbolts of Jove,
    Him I account not a more powerful god
    Than I am, nor henceforth will heed him: hear
    My reasons; when he from the skies sends down
    The rain, secure from its inclemency
    Beneath this rock I dwell, and make a feast
    On roasted calves, or on the savage prey,
    Stretched at my length supine, then drain a pitcher
    Of milk, and emulate the thunder’s sound.
    When Thracian Boreas pours his flaky showers,
    In hides of beasts my body I enwrap,
    Approach the fire, nor heed the pelting snows.
    Compelled by strong necessity, the ground
    Produces grass, and nourishes my herds,
    Whom, to no other god except myself,
    And to this belly, greatest of the gods,
    I sacrifice. Because each day to eat,
    To drink, and feel no grief, is bliss supreme,
    The Heaven, the object of the wise man’s worship.
    I leave those gloomy lawgivers to weep,
    Who by their harsh impertinent restrictions
    Have chequered human life; but will indulge
    My genius, and devour thee. That my conduct
    May be exempt from blame, thou shalt receive
    As pledges of our hospitality
    The fire, and that hereditary cauldron
    Well heated, which shall boil thy flesh: walk in,
    Ye shall adorn my table, and produce
    Delicious meals to cheer my gloomy cave,
    Such as a god can relish.

    ULY.                      I have ’scaped,
    Alas! each danger at the siege of Troy,
    ’Scaped the tempestuous ocean; but in vain
    Attempt to soften the unpitying heart
    Of him who spurns all laws. Now, sacred queen,
    Daughter of Jove, now aid me, O Minerva,
    For I such perils as far, far exceed
    My Phrygian toils, encounter: and, O Jove,
    Dread guardian of each hospitable rite,
    Who sitt’st enthroned above the radiant stars,
    Look down: for if thou view not this, though deemed
    Omnipotent, thou art a thing of nought.

                [_Exeunt_ POLYPHEME, ULYSSES, _and_ SILENUS.

    1st SEMICHOR. That insatiate throat expand,
          Boiled and roast are now at hand
          For thee, O Cyclops, to devour:
          From the coals in evil hour
          Yet reeking, shall thy teeth divide
          The limbs of each unhappy guest,
          To thy table served when dressed
          In dishes formed of shaggy hide.
          O betray me not, my friend,
          For I on you alone depend:
          Now approach the shades of night,
          Launch the bark, and aid our flight.

    2nd SEMICHOR. Thou cave, and ye unholy rites,
          Adieu, the Cyclops’ cursed delights,
          Who on his prisoners wont to feed,
          Hath banished pity from his breast.
          Inhuman execrable deed!
          On his own hearth, the suppliant guest,
          Regardless of the Lares’ guardian powers,
          Now he slays, and now devours:
          Hot from the coals, with odious jaws,
          Human flesh the miscreant gnaws.

ULYSSES, CHORUS.

    ULY. How, mighty Jove! shall I express myself?
    The dreadful scenes I in the cave have viewed
    Are so astonishing, they more resemble
    Some fable than the actions of a man.

    CHOR. What now, Ulysses, on your loved companions
    Feasts this most impious Cyclops?

    ULY.                              Two, the fattest,
    Having well viewed and poised them in his hands——

    CHOR. How did you bear, O miserable man,
    These cruel outrages?

    ULY.                  Soon as we entered
    The rocky cave, he lighted first the fire,
    On the wide blaze heaped trunks of lofty oaks,
    A load sufficient for three wains to bear;
    Then near the flaming hearth, upon the ground,
    Arranged his couch of pine leaves, filled a bowl,
    Holding about ten firkins, with the milk
    Of heifers, and beside it placed a jug
    Adorned with ivy, the circumference seemed
    Three spacious ells, the depth no less than four:
    Then made his cauldron bubble, and reached down
    Spits burnt at the extremities, and polished
    Not with a knife, but hatchets; Ætna furnished
    Such instruments for sacrifice, the stems
    Of thorn. No sooner had the hellish cook
    Finished his preparations, than he seized
    Two of my valiant comrades, whom he slew
    With calm deliberation; one he cast
    Into the hollow cauldron; from the ground
    Then lifting up his fellow by the foot
    Dashed out his brains against the pointed rock;
    Severing his flesh with an enormous knife,
    Part at the fire he roasted, and to boil,
    His other joints into the cauldron threw.
    But I, though from these eyes full many a tear
    Burst forth, approached the Cyclops, and on him
    Attended, while my friends, like timorous birds
    Lurked in the distant crannies of the rock,
    And all the blood forsook their pallid frame.
    When sated with his feast the monster lay
    Supine, and snored, a thought by Heaven inspired
    Entered this bosom; having filled a cup
    With Maron’s juice unmingled, I to him
    Bore it, that he might drink; and cried, “Behold,
    O Cyclops, son of Neptune, how divine
    The beverage which our Grecian vineyards yield
    The stream of Bacchus.” But already glutted
    With his abominable food, he seized
    And emptied the whole bumper at one draught,
    Then lifting up, in token of applause,
    His hand: “O dearest stranger,” he exclaimed,
    “To a delicious banquet thou hast added
    Delicious wine.” Perceiving he grew merry
    I plied him with a second cup, well knowing
    That wine will stagger him: he soon shall feel
    Such punishment as he deserves. He sung;
    I poured forth more and more, to warm his bowels
    With strong potations: ’midst my weeping crew
    He makes the cave with unharmonious strains
    Re-echo. But I silently came forth,
    And, if ye give consent, design to save
    You, and myself. Say, therefore, will ye fly
    From this unsocial monster, and reside
    With Grecian maids beneath the roofs of Bacchus?
    Your sire within approves of these proposals:
    But now grown feeble and o’ercharged with wine,
    Attracted by the goblet, as if birdlime
    Had smeared his wings, he wavers. But with me
    Do thou preserve thyself, for thou art young:
    And I to Bacchus, to thy ancient friend
    Far different from this Cyclops, will restore thee.

    CHOR. My dearest friend, O could we see that day,
    And ’scape yon impious monster! for we long
    Have been deprived of the enlivening bowl,
    Nor entertain a single hope of freedom.

    ULY. Now hear the means by which I can requite
    This odious savage, and thou too mayst ’scape
    From servitude.

    CHOR.          Speak, for we should not hear
    The sound of Asia’s harp with more delight,
    Than the glad tidings of the Cyclops’ death.

    ULY. By wine enlivened, he resolves to go
    And revel with his brethren.

    CHOR.                        I perceive
    You mean to seize and kill him when alone,
    By some enchantment, or to dash him headlong
    From the steep rock.

    ULY.                I have no such design
    As these: on craft alone my plan depends.

    CHOR. How then will you proceed? For we long since
    Have heard that you for wisdom are renowned.

    ULY. I will deter him from the feast, and say
    He must not portion out among the Cyclops
    This liquor, but reserve it for himself
    And lead a joyous life: when overcome
    By Bacchus’ gifts he sleeps, this sword shall point
    An olive pole, which to my purpose suited
    Lies in the cave: I in the fire will heat,
    And, when it flames, direct the hissing brand
    Full on the Cyclops’ forehead, to extinguish
    The orb of sight. As when some artist frames
    A nautic structure, he by thongs directs
    The ponderous auger: thus will I whirl round
    Within the Cyclops’ eye the kindled staff,
    And scorch his visual nerve.

    CHOR.                        Ho! I rejoice;
    This blest invention almost makes me frantic.

    ULY. Thee, and thy friends, and thy decrepit sire,
    This done, aboard my vessel will I place,
    And from this region with a double tier
    Of oars convey.

    CHOR.          But is it possible
    That I, as if dread Jove were my confederate,
    Shall guide the well-poised brand, and of his eyesight
    Deprive the monster? For I wish to share
    In such assassination.

    ULY.                  I expect
    Your aid: the brand is weighty, and requires
    Our social efforts.

    CHOR.              I’d sustain a load
    Equal to what a hundred teams convey,
    Could I dash out the cursed Cyclops’ eye
    E’en as a swarm of wasps.

    ULY.                      Be silent now;
    (Ye know my stratagem) and at my bidding
    To those who o’er th’ adventurous scheme preside
    Yield prompt obedience: for I scorn to leave
    My friends within, and save this single life.
    True, ’scape I might, already having passed
    The cavern’s deep recess: but it were mean
    If I should extricate myself alone,
    False to the faithful partners of my voyage.

                                            [_Exit_ ULYSSES.

    CHOR. Who first, who next, with steadfast hand
    Ordained to guide the flaming brand,
    The Cyclops’ radiant eye shall pierce?

    1st SEMICHOR. Silence! for from within a song
    Bursts on my ear in tuneless verse,
    Insensate minstrel, doomed ere long
    This luxurious meal to rue,
    He staggers from yon rocky cave.
    Him let us teach who never knew
    How at the banquet to behave,
    Outrageous and unmannered hind,
    Soon shall he totally be blind.

    2nd SEMICHOR. Thrice blest is he, in careless play
    ’Midst Bacchus’ orgies ever gay,
    Stretched near the social board whence glides
    The vine’s rich juice in purple tides,
    Who fondly clasps with eager arms
    The consenting virgin’s charms;
    Rich perfumes conspire to shed
    Sweetest odours on his head,
    While enamoured of the fair
    He wantons with her auburn hair.
    But hark! for surely ’tis our mate
    Exclaiming, “Who will ope the gate?”

POLYPHEME, ULYSSES, SILENUS, CHORUS.

    POL. Ha! ha! I am replete with wine, the banquet
    Hath cheered my soul: like a well-freighted ship
    My stomach’s with abundant viands stowed
    Up to my very chin. This smiling turf
    Invites me to partake a vernal feast
    With my Cyclopean brothers. Stranger, bring
    That vessel from the cave.

                                            [_Exit_ ULYSSES.

    CHOR.                      With bright-eyed grace
    Our master issues from his spacious hall;
    (Some god approves—the kindled torch—) that form
    Equals the lustre of a blooming nymph
    Fresh from the dripping caverns of the main.
    Soon shall the variegated wreath adorn
    Your temples.

    ULY. [_returning._] Hear me, Cyclops; well I know
    Th’ effect of this potation, Bacchus’ gift,
    Which I to you dispensed.

    POL.                      Yet say what sort
    Of god is Bacchus by his votaries deemed?

    ULY. The greatest source of pleasure to mankind.

    POL. I therefore to my palate find it sweet.

    ULY. A god like this to no man will do wrong.

    POL. But in a bottle how can any god
    Delight to dwell?

    ULY.              In whatsoever place
    We lodge him, the benignant power resides.

    POL. The skins of goats are an unseemly lodging
    For deities.

    ULY.        If you admire the wine,
    Why quarrel with its case?

    POL.                      Those filthy hides
    I utterly detest, but love the liquor.

    ULY. Stay here; drink, drink, O Cyclops, and be gay.

    POL. This luscious beverage, must I not impart
    To cheer my brothers?

    ULY.                  Keep it to yourself
    And you shall seem more honourable.

    POL.                                More useful,
    If I distribute largely to my friends.

    ULY. Broils, taunts, and discord from the banquet rise.

    POL. Though I am fuddled, no man dares to touch me.

    ULY. He who hath drunk too freely, O my friend,
    Ought to remain at home.

    POL.                    Devoid of reason
    Is he who when he drinks pays no regard
    To mirth and to good-fellowship.

    ULY.                            More wise,
    O’ercharged with wine, who ventures not abroad.

    POL. Shall we stay here? What think’st thou, O Silenus?

    SIL. With all my heart. What need, for our carousals,
    Of a more numerous company?

    POL.                        The ground
    Beneath our feet, a flowery turf adorns.

    SIL. O how delightful ’tis to drink, and bask
    Here in the sunshine: on this grassy couch
    Beside me take your seat.

    POL.                      Why dost thou place
    The cup behind my elbow?

    SIL.                    Lest some stranger
    Should come and snatch the precious boon away.

    POL. Thou mean’st to tope clandestinely: between us
    Here let it stand. O stranger, by what name
    Say shall I call thee?

    ULY.                  Noman is my name.
    But for what favour shall I praise your kindness?

    POL. The last of all the crew will I devour.

    ULY. A wondrous privilege is this, O Cyclops,
    Which on the stranger you bestow.

    POL.                              What mean’st thou?
    Ha! art thou drinking up the wine by stealth?

    SIL. Only the gentle Bacchus gave that kiss,
    Because I look so blooming.

    POL.                        Thou shalt weep,
    Because thy lips were to the wine applied,
    Nor did it seek thy mouth.

    SIL.                      Not thus, by Jove;
    I drank because the generous god of wine
    Declared that he admired me for my beauty.

    POL. Pour forth; give me a bumper.

    SIL.                              I must taste
    To see what mixture it requires.

    POL.                            Damnation!
    Give it me pure.

    SIL.            Not so, the heavens forbid!
    Till you the wreath bind on your ample front,
    And I again have tasted.

    POL.                    What a knave
    Is this my cupbearer!

    SIL.                  Accuse me not;
    The wine is sweet: you ought to wipe your mouth
    Before you drink.

    POL.              My lips and beard are clean.

    SIL. Loll thus upon your elbow with a grace,
    Drink as you see me drink, and imitate
    My every gesture.

    POL.              What art thou about?

    SIL. I swallowed then a most delicious bumper.

    POL. Take thou the cask, O stranger, and perform
    The office of my cupbearer.

    ULY.                        These hands
    Have been accustomed to the pleasing office.

    POL. Now pour it forth.

    ULY.                    Be silent: I obey.

    POL. Thou hast proposed a difficult restraint
    To him who largely drinks.

    ULY.                      Now drain the bowl;
    Leave nought behind: the toper must not prate
    Before his liquor’s ended.

    POL.                      In the vine
    There’s wisdom.

    ULY.            When to plenteous food you add
    An equal share of liquor, and well drench
    The throat beyond what thirst demands, you sink
    Into sweet sleep: but if you leave behind
    Aught of th’ unfinished beverage in your cup,
    Bacchus will scorch your entrails.

    POL.                              ’Tis a mercy
    How I swam out; the very heavens whirl round
    Mingled with earth. I view Jove’s throne sublime,
    And the whole synod of encircling gods.
    Were all the Graces to solicit me,
    I would not kiss them: Ganymede himself
    Appears in matchless beauty.

    SIL.                        I, O Cyclops,
    Am Jove’s own Ganymede.

    POL.                    By Heaven thou art!
    Whom from the realms of Dardanus I bore.

                                          [_Exit_ POLYPHEME.

    SIL. Ruin awaits me.

    CHOR.                Dost thou loathe him now?

    SIL. Ah me! I from this sleep shall soon behold
    The most accursed effects.

                                            [_Exit_ SILENUS.

    ULY.                      Come on, ye sons
    Of Bacchus, generous youths; for soon dissolved
    In slumber shall the monster from those jaws
    Vomit forth flesh, within the hall now smokes
    The brand, and nought remains but to burn out
    The Cyclops’ eye: act only like a man.

    CHOR. The firmness of my soul shall equal rocks
    And adamant. But go into the cave
    With speed, before tumultuous sounds assail
    Our aged father’s ears; for to effect
    Your purpose, all is ready.

    ULY.                        Vulcan, king
    Of Ætna, from this impious pest, who haunts
    Thy sacred mountain, free thyself at once,
    By burning out his glaring eye; and thou
    Nurtured by sable night, O sleep, invade
    With thy resistless force this beast abhorred
    By Heaven; nor after all the glorious deeds
    Achieved at Ilion, with his faithful sailors,
    Destroy Ulysses’ self, by him who heeds
    Nor god nor mortal. Else must we hold fortune
    A goddess, and all other deities
    Inferior to resistless fortune’s power.

                                            [_Exit_ ULYSSES.

    CHOR. The neck of him who slays his guest,
    With burning pincers shall be prest,
    And fire bereaving him of sight
    Soon shall destroy that orb of light.
    Within the embers near at hand
    Lies concealed a smoking brand,
    Torn from its parental tree.
    Maron, we depend on thee;
    May th’ exasperated foe
    With success direct the blow!
    May the Cyclops lose his eye,
    And curse his ill-timed jollity!
    Thee, Bromius, how I long to meet
    Thy front adorned with ivy twine;
    Leaving this abhorred retreat.
    Ah, when shall such delight be mine?

ULYSSES, CHORUS.

    ULY. Be silent, O ye savages, restrain
    Those clamorous tongues: by Heaven ye shall not breathe,
    Nor wink your eyes, nor cough, lest ye awaken
    This pest, the Cyclops, ere he of his eyesight
    Is by the fire bereft.

    CHOR.                  We will be silent,
    And in our jaws confine the very air.

    ULY. The ponderous weapon seize with dauntless hands,
    Entering the cavern; for ’tis fully heated.

    CHOR. Will you not give directions who shall first
    Manage the glowing lever, and burn out
    The Cyclops’ eye, that in one common fortune
    We all may share.

    1st SEMICHOR.      We who before the portals
    Are stationed, are not tall enough to drive
    Full on its destined mark the hissing brand.

    2nd SEMICHOR. But I am with a sudden lameness seized.

    1st SEMICHOR. The same calamity which you experience
    To me hath also happened; for my feet
    Are by convulsions tortured, though the cause
    I know not.

    ULY.        If ye feel such dreadful spasms,
    How can ye stand?

    CHOR.            Our eyes are also filled
    With dust or ashes.

    ULY.                These allies of mine
    Are worthless cowards.

    CHOR.                  We forsooth want courage
    Because we feel compassion for our shoulders,
    Nor would be beaten till our teeth drop out.
    But I a magic incantation know,
    Devised by Orpheus, which hath such effect,
    That of its own accord the brand shall pierce
    The skull of him, the one-eyed son of earth.

    ULY. Long have I known ye are by nature such;
    But more than ever do I know you now.
    On my own friends I therefore must rely.
    Yet if thou hast no vigour in that arm,
    Exhort my drooping friends to act with valour
    And let thy counsels aid the bold emprise.

                                            [_Exit_ ULYSSES.

    CHOR. Such be my province: we this Carian’s life
    Will hazard. But my counsels shall induce them
    To burn the Cyclops. Ho! with courage whirl
    The brand, delay not to scorch out the eye
    Of him who banquets on the stranger’s flesh.
    With fire assail the savage, pierce the front
    Of Ætna’s shepherd, lest, with anguish stung,
    On you he perpetrate some deed of horror.

    POL. [_within._] Ah me! by burning coals I am deprived
    Of eyesight.

    CHOR.        That was a melodious pæan:
    To me, O Cyclops, sing th’ enchanting strain.

POLYPHEME, CHORUS.

    POL. Ah, how am I insulted and destroyed!
    Yet shall ye never from this hollow rock
    Escape triumphant, O ye things of nought:
    For in my station rooted, where this cleft
    Opens a door, will I spread forth my hands
    And stop your passage!

    CHOR.                  Ha! what means these outcries,
    O Cyclops?

    POL.      I am ruined.

    CHOR.                  You appear
    To have much been abused.

    POL.                      Deplorably.

    CHOR. When fuddled, did you fall ’mid burning coals?

    POL. Noman hath ruined me.

    CHOR.                      To you then no one
    Hath offered any wrong.

    POL.                    These lids hath Noman
    Deprived of sight.

    CHOR.              You therefore are not blind.

    POL. Would thou couldst see as little.

    CHOR.                                  How can no man
    Put out your eye?

    POL.              Thou art disposed to jest.
    But where is Noman?

    CHOR.              He is nowhere, Cyclops.

    POL. That execrable stranger, mark me well,
    Is author of my ruin, who produced
    The fraudful draught, and burned my visual nerves.

    CHOR. Wine is invincible.

    POL.                      By all the gods,
    Answer me I conjure you; did they fly,
    Or are they here within?

    CHOR.                    They on the top
    Of yonder rock which screens them from your reach,
    In silence take their stand.

    POL.                        But on which side?

    CHOR. Your right.

    POL.              Where, where?

    CHOR.                          Upon that very rock.
    Have you yet caught them?

    POL.                      To mischance succeeds
    Mischance; I have fallen down and cracked my skull.

    CHOR. They ’scape you now.

    POL.                      Ye misinformed me sure;
    They are not here.

    CHOR.              I say not that they are.

    POL. Where then?

    CHOR.            They wheel around you on your left.

    POL. Ah me! I am derided, ye but mock
    At my affliction.

    CHOR.            They are there no longer:
    But Noman stands before you.

    POL.                        O thou villain,
    Where art thou?

ULYSSES, POLYPHEME, CHORUS.

    ULY.            Keeping cautiously aloof,
    Thus I, Ulysses, guard my threatened life.

    POL. What saidst thou? Wherefore hast thou changed thy name
    T’ assume a new one?

    ULY.                Me my father named
    Ulysses. It was destined you should suffer
    A just requital for your impious feast;
    For I in vain had with consuming flames
    Laid Ilion waste, had I forborne t’ avenge
    On you the murder of my valiant friends.

    POL. Now is that ancient oracle, alas!
    Accomplished, which foretold, that I by thee,
    On thy return from Troy, should be deprived
    Of sight: but that thou also for a deed
    So cruel, shalt be punished, and full long
    Endure the beating of tempestuous waves.

    ULY. Go weep, my actions justify these words.
    But to the shore I haste; and to my country
    Will steer the vessel o’er Sicilia’s waves.

    POL. Thou shalt not; with this fragment of the rock
    Hurled at thy head, thee and thy perjured crew
    Will I demolish: for I yet, though blind,
    Can mount the cliff which overhangs the port,
    And in its wonted crannies fix my steps.

    CHOR. But we, blest partners in Ulysses’ voyage,
    Henceforth the laws of Bacchus will obey.




HELEN.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    HELEN.
    TEUCER.
    CHORUS OF GRECIAN DAMES (HELEN’S ATTENDANTS).
    MENELAUS.
    FEMALE SERVANT.
    MESSENGER.
    THEOCLYMENUS.
    THEONOE.
    CASTOR AND POLLUX.


SCENE.—PROTEUS’ TOMB, AT THE ENTRANCE OF THEOCLYMENUS’ PALACE IN PHAROS,
AN ISLAND AT THE MOUTH OF THE NILE.

HELEN.

    Bright are these virgin currents of the Nile
    Which water Egypt’s soil, and are supplied,
    Instead of drops from heaven, by molten snow.
    But Proteus, while he lived, of these domains
    Was lord, he in the isle of Pharos dwelt,
    King of all Ægypt; for his wife he gained
    One of the nymphs who haunt the briny deep,
    Fair Psamathe, after she left the bed
    Of Æacus; she in the palace bore
    To him two children, one of them a son
    Called Theoclymenus, because his life
    Is passed in duteous homage to the gods;
    A daughter also of majestic mien,
    Her mother’s darling, in her infant years
    (Eidothea called by her enraptured sire):
    But when the blooming maid became mature
    For nuptial joys, Theonoe was the name
    They gave her; all the counsels of the gods,
    The present and the future, well she knew,
    Such privilege she from her grandsire Nereus
    Inherited. But not to fame unknown
    Are Sparta’s realm, whence I derive my birth,
    And my sire, Tyndarus. There prevails a rumour
    That to my mother Leda Jove was borne
    On rapid wings, the figure of a swan
    Assuming, and by treachery gained admission
    To her embraces, flying from an eagle,
    If we may credit such report. My name
    Is Helen; but I also will recount
    What woes I have endured; three goddesses,
    For beauty’s prize contending, in the cave
    Of Ida, came to Paris; Juno, Venus,
    And Pallas, virgin progeny of Jove,
    Requesting him to end their strife, and judge
    Whose charms outshone her rivals. But proposing
    For a reward, my beauty (if the name
    Of beauty suit this inauspicious form)
    And promising in marriage to bestow me
    On Paris, Venus conquered: for the swain
    Of Ida, leaving all his herds behind,
    Expecting to receive me for his bride,
    To Sparta came. But Juno, whose defeat
    Fired with resentment her indignant soul,
    Our nuptials frustrated; for to the arms
    Of royal Priam’s son, she gave not me,
    But in my semblance formed a living image
    Composed of ether. Paris falsely deemed
    That he possessed me; from that time these ills
    Have been increased by the decrees of Jove,
    For he with war hath visited the realms
    Of Greece, and Phrygia’s miserable sons,
    That he might lighten from th’ unrighteous swarms
    Of its inhabitants the groaning earth,
    And on the bravest of the Grecian chiefs
    Confer renown. While in the Phrygian war,
    As the reward of their victorious arms,
    I to the host of Greece have been displayed,
    Though absent, save in likeness and in name.
    But Mercury, receiving me in folds
    Of air, and covering with a cloud (for Jove
    Was not unmindful of me), in this house
    Of royal Proteus, who of all mankind
    Was in his judgment the most virtuous, placed me,
    That undefiled I might preserve the bed
    Of Menelaus. I indeed am here;
    But with collected troops my hapless lord
    Pursues the ravisher to Ilion’s towers.
    Beside Scamander’s stream hath many a chief
    Died in my cause; but I, who have endured
    All these afflictions, am a public curse;
    For ’tis supposed, that treacherous to my lord,
    I have through Greece blown up the flames of war.
    Why then do I prolong my life? these words
    I heard from Mercury: “That I again
    In Sparta, with my husband shall reside,
    When he discovers that I never went
    To Troy:” he therefore counselled me to keep
    A spotless chastity. While Proteus viewed
    The solar beams, I from the nuptial yoke
    Still lived exempt; but since the darksome grave
    Hath covered his remains, the royal son
    Of the deceased solicits me to wed him:
    But honouring my first husband, at this tomb
    Of Proteus, I a suppliant kneel, to him,
    To him I sue, to guard my nuptial couch,
    That if through Greece I bear a name assailed
    By foul aspersions, no unseemly deed
    May cover me with real infamy.

TEUCER, HELEN.

    TEU. Who rules this fortress? such a splendid dome
    With royal porticos and blazoned roofs
    Seems worthy of a Plutus for its lord.
    But, O ye gods, what vision! I behold
    That hateful woman who hath ruined me,
    And all the Greeks. Heaven’s vengeance on thy head!
    Such a resemblance bear’st thou to that Helen,
    That if I were not in a foreign land,
    I with this stone would smite thee; thou shouldst bleed
    For being like Jove’s daughter.

    HEL.                            Wretched man,
    Whoe’er you are, why do you hate me thus
    Because of her misfortunes?

    TEU.                        I have erred
    In giving way to such unseemly rage.
    All Greece abhors Jove’s daughter. But forgive me,
    O woman, for the words which I have uttered.

    HEL. Say who you are, and from what land you come?

    TEU. One of that miserable race the Greeks.

    HEL. No wonder is it then, if you detest
    The Spartan Helen. But to me declare,
    Who are you, whence, and from what father sprung?

    TEU. My name is Teucer, Telamon my sire;
    The land which nurtured me is Salamis.

    HEL. But wherefore do you wander o’er these meads
    Laved by the Nile?

    TEU.              I from my native land
    Am banished.

    HEL.        You, alas! must needs be wretched.
    Who drove you thence?

    TEU.                  My father Telamon.
    What friend canst thou hold dearer?

    HEL.                                For what cause
    Were you to exile doomed? your situation
    Is most calamitous.

    TEU.                My brother Ajax,
    Who died at Troy, was author of my ruin.

    HEL. How? by your sword deprived of life?

    TEU.                                    He fell,
    On his own blade, and perished.

    HEL.                            Was he mad?
    Who could act thus whose intellects are sound?

    TEU. Know’st thou Achilles, Peleus’ son?

    HEL.                                    He erst,
    I heard, to Helen as a suitor came.

    TEU. He, at his death, his comrades left to strive
    Which should obtain his arms.

    HEL.                          But why was this
    Hurtful to Ajax?

    TEU.            When another won
    Those arms, he gave up life.

    HEL.                        Do your afflictions
    Rise from his fate?

    TEU.                Because I died not with him.

    HEL. O stranger, went you then to Troy’s famed city?

    TEU. And having shared in laying waste its bulwarks,
    I also perished.

    HEL.            Have the flames consumed,
    And utterly destroyed them?

    TEU.                        Not a trace
    Of those proud walls is now to be discerned.

    HEL. Through thee, O Helen, do the Phrygians perish.

    TEU. The Greeks too: for most grievous are the mischiefs
    Which have been wrought.

    HEL.                    What length of time’s elapsed
    Since Troy was sacked?

    TEU.                  Seven times the fruitful year
    Hath almost turned around her lingering wheel.

    HEL. But how much longer did your host remain
    Before those bulwarks?

    TEU.                  Many a tedious moon;
    There full ten years were spent.

    HEL.                            And have ye taken
    That Spartan dame?

    TEU.              By her dishevelled hair,
    Th’ adult’ress, Menelaus dragged away.

    HEL. Did you behold that object of distress,
    Or speak you from report?

    TEU.                      These eyes as clearly
    Witnessed the whole, as I now view thy face.

    HEL. Be cautious, lest for her ye should mistake
    Some well-formed semblance which the gods have sent.

    TEU. Talk if thou wilt on any other subject;
    No more of her.

    HEL.            Believe you this opinion
    To be well-grounded?

    TEU.                With these eyes I saw her,
    And she e’en now is present to my soul.

    HEL. Have Menelaus and his consort reached
    Their home.

    TEU.        They are not in the Argive land,
    Nor on Eurotas’ banks.

    HEL.                  Alas! alas!
    The tale you have recounted, is to her
    Who hears you, an event most inauspicious.

    TEU. He and his consort, both they say are dead.

    HEL. Did not the Greeks in one large squadron sail?

    TEU. Yes; but a storm dispersed their shattered fleet.

    HEL. Where were they, in what seas?

    TEU.                                They at that time
    Through the mid waves of the Ægean deep
    Were passing.

    HEL.          Can none tell if Menelaus
    Escaped this tempest?

    TEU.                  No man; but through Greece
    ’Tis rumoured he is dead.

    HEL.                      I am undone.
    Is Thestius’ daughter living?

    TEU.                          Mean’st thou Leda?
    She with the dead is numbered.

    HEL.                          Did the shame
    Of Helen cause her wretched mother’s death?

    TEU. Around her neck, ’tis said the noble dame
    Entwined the gliding noose.

    HEL.                        But live the sons
    Of Tyndarus, or are they too now no more?

    TEU. They are, and are not, dead; for two accounts
    Are propagated.

    HEL.            Which is best confirmed?
    O wretched me!

    TEU.          Some say that they are gods
    Under the semblance of two radiant stars.

    HEL. Well have you spoken. But what else is rumoured?

    TEU. That on account of their lost sister’s guilt
    They died by their own swords. But of these themes
    Enough: I wish not to renew my sorrows.
    But O assist me in the great affairs
    On which I to these royal mansions came,
    Wishing to see the prophetess Theonoe,
    And learn, from Heaven’s oracular response,
    How I may steer my vessel with success
    To Cyprus’ isle, where Phœbus hath foretold
    That I shall dwell, and on the walls I rear
    Bestow the name of Salamis, yet mindful
    Of that dear country I have left behind.

    HEL. This will your voyage of itself explain:
    But fly from these inhospitable shores,
    Ere Proteus’ son, the ruler of this land,
    Behold you: fly, for he is absent now
    Pursuing with his hounds the savage prey.
    He slays each Grecian stranger who becomes
    His captive: ask not why, for I am silent;
    And what could it avail you to be told?

    TEU. O woman, most discreetly hast thou spoken;
    Thy kindness may the righteous gods repay!
    For though thy person so resemble Helen,
    Thou hast a soul unlike that worthless dame.
    Perdition seize her; never may she reach
    The current of Eurotas: but mayst thou,
    Most generous woman, be for ever blest.

                                             [_Exit_ TEUCER.

    HEL. Plunged as I am ’midst great and piteous woes,
    How shall I frame the plaintive strain, what Muse
    With tears, or doleful elegies, invoke?

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          Ye syrens, winged daughters of the earth,
          Come and attune the sympathetic string,
              Expressive now no more of mirth,
          To soothe my griefs, the flute of Libya bring;
          Record the tortures which this bosom rend,
          And echo back my elegiac strains:
          Proserpine next will I invoke, to send
          Numbers adapted to her votary’s pains;
        So shall her dark abode, while many a tear I shed,
          Waft the full dirge to soothe th’ illustrious dead.

CHORUS, HELEN.

CHORUS.

    I. 2.

          Near the cerulean margin of our streams
          I stood, and on the tufted herbage spread
              My purple vestments in those beams
          Which from his noontide orb Hyperion shed,
          When on a sudden from the waving reeds
          I heard a plaintive and unwelcome sound
          Of bitter lamentation; o’er the meads
          Groans inarticulate were poured around:
        Beneath the rocky cave, dear scene of past delight,
          Some Naiad thus bewails Pan’s hasty flight.

    HELEN.

    II. 1.

          Ye Grecian nymphs, whom those barbarians caught,
          And from your native land reluctant bore,
              The tidings which yon sailor brought
          Call forth these tears; for Ilion is no more,
          By him of Ida, that predicted flame
          Destroyed; through me, alas! have myriads bled,
          If not through me, through my detested name.
          By th’ ignominious noose is Leda dead
          Who my imaginary guilt deplored;
          And doomed by the relentless Fates in vain
          To tedious wanderings, my unhappy lord
          At length hath perished ’midst the billowy main:
          The twin protectors of their native land,
          Castor and Pollux, from all human eyes
          Are vanished, they have left Eurotas’ strand,
        And fields, in playful strife where each young wrestler vies.

CHORUS.

    II. 2.

          My royal mistress, your disastrous fate
          With many a groan and fruitless tear I mourn.
              I from that hour your sorrows date
          When amorous Jove on snowy pinions borne,
          In form a swan, by Leda was carest.
          Is there an evil you have not endured?
          Your mother is no more, through you unblest
          Are Jove’s twin sons. Nor have your vows procured
          Of your dear country the enchanting sight.
          A rumour too through various realms hath spread,
          Caught by the envious vulgar with delight,
          Assigning you to the barbarian’s bed.
          Amid the waves, far from the wished-for shore,
          Your husband hath been buried in the main.
          You shall behold your native walls no more
        Nor under burnished roofs your wonted state maintain.

HELEN.

    III.

          What Phrygian artist on the top of Ide,
              Or vagrant of a Grecian line,
              Felled that inauspicious pine,
          To frame the bark which Paris o’er the tide
              Dared with barbaric oars to guide,
          When to my palace, in an evil hour
              Caught by beauty’s magic power,
              He came to seize me for his bride?
          But crafty Venus, authoress of these broils,
          Marched thither, leagued with death, t’ annoy
              Triumphant Greece and vanquished Troy,
          (Wretch that I am, consumed with endless toils!)
          And Juno seated on her golden throne,
              Consort of thundering Jove,
            Sent Hermes from the realms above,
          Who found me, when I carelessly had strewn
            Leaves plucked from roses in my vest,
              As Minerva’s votary drest;
              He bore me through the paths of air
              To this loathed, this dreary land,
          Called Greece, and Priam’s friends the strife to share,
          And roused to bloody deeds each rival band;
              Where Simois’ current glides, my name
              Hence is marked with groundless shame.

    CHOR. Your woes I know are grievous: but to bear
    With tranquil mind the necessary ills
    Of life, is most expedient.

    HEL.                        To what ills
    Have I been subject, O my dear companions!
    Did not my mother, as a prodigy
    Which wondering mortals gaze at, bring me forth?
    For neither Grecian nor barbaric dame
    Till then produced an egg, in which her children
    Enveloped lay, as they report, from Jove
    Leda engendered. My whole life and all
    That hath befallen me, but conspires to form
    One series of miraculous events;
    To Juno some, and to my beauty some.
    Are owing. Would to Heaven, that, like a tablet
    Whose picture is effaced, I could exchange
    This form for one less comely, since the Greeks
    Forgetting those abundant gifts showered down
    By prosperous Fortune which I now possess,
    Think but of what redounds not to my honour,
    And still remember my ideal shame.
    Whoever therefore, with one single species
    Of misery is afflicted by the gods,
    Although the weight of Heaven’s chastising hand
    Be grievous, may with fortitude endure
    Such visitation: but by many woes
    Am I oppressed, and first of all exposed
    To slanderous tongues, although I ne’er have erred.
    It were a lesser evil e’en to sin
    Then be suspected falsely. Then the gods,
    ’Midst men of barbarous manners, placed me far
    From my loved country: torn from every friend,
    I languish here, to servitude consigned
    Although of free born race: for ’midst barbarians
    Are all enslaved but one, their haughty lord.
    My fortunes had this single anchor left,
    Perchance my husband might at length arrive
    To snatch me from my woes; but he, alas!
    Is now no more, my mother too is dead,
    And I am deemed her murd’ress, though unjustly,
    Yet am I branded with this foul reproach;
    And she who was the glory of our house,
    My daughter in the virgin state grown grey,
    Still droops unwedded: my illustrious brothers,
    Castor and Pollux, called the sons of Jove,
    Are now no more. But I impute my death,
    Crushed as I am by all these various woes,
    Not to my own misdeeds, but to the power
    Of adverse fortune only: this one danger
    There yet remains, if at my native land
    I should again arrive, they will confine me
    In a close dungeon, thinking me that Helen
    Who dwelt in Ilion, till she thence was borne
    By Menelaus. Were my husband living,
    We might have known each other, by producing
    Those tokens to which none beside are privy:
    But this will never be, nor can he e’er
    Return in safety. To what purpose then
    Do I still lengthen out this wretched being?
    To what new fortunes am I still reserved?
    Shall I select a husband, but to vary
    My present ills, to dwell beneath the roof
    Of a barbarian, at luxurious boards
    With wealth abounding, seated? for the dame
    Whom wedlock couples with the man she hates
    Death is the best expedient. But with glory
    How shall I die? the fatal noose appears
    To be so base, that e’en in slaves ’tis held
    Unseemly thus to perish; in the poniard
    There’s somewhat great and generous. But to me
    Delays are useless: welcome instant death:
    Into such depth of misery am I plunged.
    For beauty renders other women blest,
    But hath to me the source of ruin proved.

    CHOR. O Helen, whosoe’er the stranger be
    Who hither came, believe not that the whole
    Of what he said, is truth.

    HEL.                      But in plain terms
    Hath he announced my dearest husband’s death.

    CHOR. The false assertions which prevail, are many.

    HEL. Clear is the language in which honest Truth
    Loves to express herself.

    CHOR.                    You are inclined
    Rather to credit inauspicious tidings
    Than those which are more favourable.

    HEL.                                  By fears
    Encompassed, am I hurried to despair.

    CHOR. What hospitable treatment have you found
    Beneath these roofs?

    HEL.                All here, except the man
    Who seeks to wed me, are my friends.

    CHOR.                                You know
    How then to act: leave this sepulchral gloom.

    HEL. What are the counsels, or the cheering words
    You wish to introduce?

    CHOR.                  Go in, and question
    The daughter of the Nereid, her who knows
    All hidden truths, Theonoe, if your lord
    Yet live, or view the solar beams no more:
    And when you have learnt this, as suit your fortunes
    Indulge your joys, or pour forth all your tears:
    But ere you know aught fully, what avail
    Your sorrows? therefore listen to my words;
    Leaving this tomb, attend the maid: from her
    Shall you know all. But why should you look farther
    When truth is in these mansions to be found?
    With you the doors I’ll enter; we together
    The royal virgin’s oracles will hear.
    For ’tis a woman’s duty to exert
    Her utmost efforts in a woman’s cause.

    HEL. My friends, your wholesome counsels I approve:
    But enter ye these doors, that ye, within
    The palace, my calamities may hear.

    CHOR. You summon her who your commands obeys
    Without reluctance.

    HEL.                Woeful day! ah me,
    What lamentable tidings shall I hear?

    CHOR. Forbear these plaintive strains, my dearest queen,
    Nor with presaging soul anticipate
    Evils to come.

    HEL.          What hath my wretched lord
    Endured? Doth he yet view the light, the sun
    Borne in his radiant chariot, and the paths
    Of all the starry train? Or hath he shared
    The common lot of mortals, is he plunged
    Among the dead, beneath th’ insatiate grave?

    CHOR. O construe what time yet may bring to pass
    In the most favourable terms.

    HEL.                          On thee
    I call to testify, and thee adjure,
    Eurotas, on whose verdant margin grow
    The waving reeds: O tell me, if my lord
    Be dead, as fame avers.

    CHOR.                  Why do you utter
    These incoherent ditties?

    HEL.                      Round my neck
    The deadly noose will I entwine, or drive
    With my own hand a poinard through my breast;
    For I was erst the cause of bloody strife;
    But now am I a victim, to appease
    The wrath of those three goddesses who strove
    On Ida’s mount, when ’midst the stalls where fed
    His lowing herds, the son of Priam waked
    The sylvan reed, to celebrate my beauty.

    CHOR. Cause these averted ills, ye gods, to light
    On other heads; but, O my royal mistress,
    May you be happy.

    HEL.              Thou, O wretched Troy,
    To crimes which thou hast ne’er committed, ow’st
    Thy ruin, and those horrible disasters
    Thou hast endured. For as my nuptial gifts,
    Hath Venus caused an intermingled stream
    Of blood and tears to flow, she, griefs to griefs
    And tears to tears hath added; all these sufferings
    Have been the miserable Ilion’s lot.
    Of their brave sons the mothers were bereft
    The virgin sisters of the mighty dead
    Strewed their shorn tresses on Scamander’s banks,
    While, by repeated shrieks, victorious Greece
    Her woes expressing, smote her laurelled head,
    And with her nails deep furrowing tore her cheeks.
    Happy Calisto, thou Arcadian nymph
    Who didst ascend the couch of Jove, transformed
    To a four-footed savage, far more blest
    Art thou than she to whom I owe my birth:
    For thou beneath the semblance of a beast,
    Thy tender limbs with shaggy hide o’erspread,
    And glaring with stern visage, by that change
    Didst end thy griefs. She too whom Dian drove
    Indignant from her choir, that hind whose horns
    Were tipped with gold, the bright Titanian maid,
    Daughter of Merops, to her beauty owed
    That transformation: but my charms have ruined
    Both Troy and the unhappy Grecian host.

                               [_Exeunt_ HELEN _and_ CHORUS.

MENELAUS.

      O Pelops, in the strife on Pisa’s field,
    Who didst outstrip the fiery steeds that whirled
    The chariot of Oenomaus, would to Heaven
    That when thy severed limbs before the gods
    Were at the banquet placed, thou then thy life
    Amidst the blest immortal powers hadst closed,
    Ere thou my father Atreus didst beget,
    Whose issue by his consort Ærope
    Were Agamemnon and myself, two chiefs
    Of high renown. No ostentatious words
    Are these; but such a numerous host, I deem,
    As that which we to Ilion’s shore conveyed,
    Ne’er stemmed the tide before; these troops their king
    Led not by force to combat, but bore rule
    O’er Grecian youths his voluntary subjects,
    And among these, some heroes, now no more,
    May we enumerate; others from the sea
    Who ’scaped with joy, and to their homes returned,
    E’en after fame had classed them with the dead.
    But I, most wretched, o’er the briny waves
    Of ocean wander, since I have o’erthrown
    The battlements of Troy, and though I wish
    Again to reach my country; by the gods
    Am I esteemed unworthy of such bliss.
    E’en to the Libyan deserts have I sailed,
    And traversed each inhospitable scene
    Of brutal outrage; still as I approach
    My country, the tempestuous winds repel me,
    Nor hath a prosperous breeze from Heaven yet filled
    My sails, to waft me to the Spartan coast:
    And now a shipwrecked, miserable man,
    Reft of my friends, I on these shores am cast,
    My vessel hath been shivered ’gainst the rocks
    Into a thousand fragments: on the keel,
    The only part which yet remains entire
    Of all that fabric, scarce could I and Helen,
    Whom I from Troy have borne, escape with life
    Through fortunes unforeseen: but of this land
    And its inhabitants, the name I know not:
    For with the crowd I blushed to intermingle
    Lest they my squalid garments should observe,
    Through shame my wants concealing. For the man
    Of an exalted station, when assailed
    By adverse fortune, having never learned
    How to endure calamity, is plunged
    Into a state far worse than he whose woes
    Have been of ancient date. But pinching need
    Torments me: for I have not either food
    Or raiment to protect my shivering frame,
    Which may be guessed from these vile rags I wear
    Cast up from my wrecked vessel: for the sea
    Hath swallowed up my robes, my tissued vests,
    And every ensign of my former state.
    Within the dark recesses of a cave
    Having concealed my wife, that guilty cause
    Of all my woes, and my surviving friends
    Enjoined to guard her, hither am I come.
    Alone, in quest of necessary aid
    For my brave comrades whom I there have left,
    If by my search I haply can obtain it,
    I roam; but when I viewed this house adorned
    With gilded pinnacles, and gates that speak
    The riches of their owner, I advanced:
    For I have hopes that from this wealthy mansion
    I, somewhat for my sailors, shall obtain.
    But they who want the necessary comforts
    Of life, although they are disposed to aid us,
    Yet have not wherewithal. Ho! who comes forth
    From yonder gate, my doleful tale to bear
    Into the house?

FEMALE SERVANT, MENELAUS.

    FEMALE SER. Who at the threshold stands?
    Wilt thou not hence depart, lest thy appearance
    Before these doors give umbrage to our lords?
    Else shalt thou surely die, because thou cam’st
    From Greece, whose sons shall never hence return.

    MEN. Well hast thou spoken, O thou aged dame.
    Wilt thou permit me? For to thy behests
    Must I submit: but suffer me to speak.

    FEMALE SER. Depart: for ’tis my duty to permit
    No Greek to enter this imperial dome.

    MEN. Lift not thy hand against me, nor attempt
    To drive me hence by force.

    FEMALE SER.                Thou wilt not yield
    To my advice, thou therefore art to blame.

    MEN. Carry my message to thy lords within.

    FEMALE SER. I fear lest somewhat dreadful might ensue,
    Should I repeat your words.

    MEN.                        I hither come
    A shipwrecked man, a stranger, one of those
    Whom all hold sacred.

    FEMALE SER.          To some other house,
    Instead of this, repair.

    MEN.                    I am determined
    To enter: but comply with my request.

    FEMALE SER. Be well assured thou art unwelcome here,
    And shalt ere long by force be driven away.

    MEN. Alas! alas! where are my valiant troops?

    FEMALE SER. Elsewhere, perhaps, thou wert a mighty man;
    But here art thou no longer such.

    MEN.                              O Fortune!
    How am I galled with undeserved reproach!

    FEMALE SER. Why are those eyelids moist with tears, why griev’st thou?

    MEN. Because I once was happy.

    FEMALE SER.                    Then depart,
    And mingle social tears with those thou lov’st.

    MEN. But what domain is this, to whom belong
    These royal mansions?

    FEMALE SER.          Proteus here resides;
    This land is Egypt.

    MEN.                Egypt? wretched me!
    Ah, whither have I sailed!

    FEMALE SER.                But for what cause
    Scorn’st thou the race of Nile?

    MEN.                            I scorn them not:
    My own disastrous fortunes I bewail.

    FEMALE SER. Many are wretched, thou in this respect
    Art nothing singular.

    MEN.                  Is he, the king
    Thou speak’st of, here within?

    FEMALE SER.                    To him belongs
    This tomb; his son is ruler of this land.

    MEN. But where is he: abroad, or in the palace?

    FEMALE SER. He’s not within; but to the Greeks he bears
    The greatest enmity.

    MEN.                Whence rose this hate,
    Productive of such bitter fruits to me?

    FEMALE SER. Beneath these roofs Jove’s daughter Helen dwells.

    MEN. What mean’st thou? Ha! what words with wonder fraught
    Are these which thou hast uttered? O repeat them.

    FEMALE SER. The child of Tyndarus, she who in the realm
    Of Sparta erst abode.

    MEN.                  Whence came she hither?
    How can this be?

    FEMALE SER.      From Lacedæmon’s realm.

    MEN. When? Hath my wife been torn from yonder cave?

    FEMALE SER. Before the Greeks, O stranger, went to Troy
    Retreat then from these mansions, for within
    Hath happened a calamitous event,
    By which the palace is disturbed. Thou com’st
    Unseasonably, and if the king surprise thee,
    Instead of hospitable treatment, death
    Must be thy portion. To befriend the Greeks
    Though well inclined, yet thee have I received
    With these harsh words, because I fear the monarch.

                                     [_Exit_ FEMALE SERVANT.

    MEN. What shall I say? For I, alas! am told
    Of present sorrows added to the past.
    Come I not hither, after having borne
    From vanquished Troy my consort, whom I left
    Within yon cave well guarded? Yet here dwells
    Another Helen, whom that woman called
    Jove’s daughter. Lives there on the banks of Nile
    A man who bears the sacred name of Jove?
    For in the heavens there’s only one. What country,
    But that where glides Eurotas’ stream beset
    With waving reeds, is Sparta? Tyndarus’ name
    Suits him alone. But is there any land
    Synonymous with Lacedæmon’s realm,
    And that of Troy? I know not how to solve
    This doubt; for there are many, it appears,
    In various regions of the world, who bear
    Like appellations; city corresponds
    With city; woman borrows that of woman;
    Nor must we therefore wonder. Yet again
    Here will I stay, though danger be announced
    By yonder aged servant at the door:
    For there is no man so devoid of pity
    As not to give me food, when he the name
    Of Menelaus hears. That dreadful fire
    By which the Phrygian bulwarks were consumed
    Is memorable, and I who kindled it
    Am known in every land. I’ll therefore wait
    Until the master of this house return.
    But I have two expedients, and will practise
    That which my safety shall require; of soul
    Obdurate, if he prove, in my wrecked bark
    Can I conceal myself, but if the semblance
    Which he puts on, be mild, I for relief
    From these my present miseries, will apply.
    But this of all the woes that I endure
    Is the most grievous, that from other kings
    I, though a king myself, should be reduced
    To beg my food: but thus hath Fate ordained.
    Nor is it my assertion, but a maxim
    Among the wise established, that there’s nought
    More powerful than the dread behests of Fate.

HELEN, CHORUS, MENELAUS.

    CHOR. I heard what yon prophetic maid foretold,
        Who in the palace did unfold
    The oracles; that to the shades profound
        Of Erebus, beneath the ground
    Interred, not yet hath Menelaus ta’en
        His passage: on the stormy main
    Still tossed, he cannot yet approach the strand,
        The haven of the Spartan land:
    The chief, who now his vagrant life bewails,
        Without a friend, unfurls his sails,
    From Ilion’s realm to every distant shore
        Borne o’er the deep with luckless oar.

    HEL. I to this hallowed tomb again repair,
    Now I have heard the grateful tidings uttered
    By sage Theonoe, who distinctly knows
    All that hath happened? for she says my lord
    Is living, and yet views the solar beams:
    But after passing o’er unnumbered straits
    Of ocean, to a vagrant’s wretched life
    Full long inured, on these Ægyptian coasts,
    When he his toils hath finished, shall arrive.
    Yet there is one thing more, which she hath left
    Unmentioned, whether he shall come with safety.
    This question I neglected to propose,
    O’erjoyed when she informed me he yet lives;
    She also adds, that he is near the land,
    From his wrecked ship, with his few friends, cast forth,
    O mayst thou come at length; for ever dear
    To me wilt thou arrive. Ha! who is that?
    Am not I caught, through some deceitful scheme
    Of Proteus’ impious son, in hidden snares?
    Like a swift courser, or the madding priestess
    Of Bacchus, shall I not with hasty step
    Enter the tomb, because his looks are fierce
    Who rushes on, and strives to overtake me?

    MEN. On thee I call, who to the yawning trench
    Around that tomb, and blazing altars hiest
    Precipitate. Stay: wherefore dost thou fly?
    With what amazement doth thy presence strike
    And almost leave me speechless!

    HEL.                            O my friends,
    I suffer violence; for from the tomb
    I by this man am dragged, who to the king
    Will give me, from whose nuptial couch I fled.

    MEN. We are no pirates, nor the ministers
    Of lustful villany.

    HEL.                Yet is the vest
    You wear unseemly.

    MEN.              Stay thy rapid flight,
    Dismiss thy fears.

    HEL.              I stop, now I have reached
    This hallowed spot.

    MEN.                Say, woman, who thou art;
    What face do I behold?

    HEL.                  But who are you?
    For I by the same reasons am induced
    To ask this question.

    MEN.                  Never did I see
    A greater likeness.

    HEL.                O ye righteous gods!
    For ’tis a privilege the gods alone
    Confer, to recognize our long-lost friends.

    MEN. Art thou a Grecian or a foreign dame?

    HEL. Of Greece: but earnestly I wish to know
    Whence you derive your origin.

    MEN.                          In thee
    A wonderful resemblance I discern
    Of Helen.

    HEL.      Menelaus’ very features
    These eyes in you behold, still at a loss
    Am I for words t’ express my thoughts.

    MEN.                                Full clearly
    Hast thou discovered a most wretched man.

    HEL. O to thy consort’s arms at length restored!

    MEN. To what a consort? O forbear to touch
    My garment!

    HEL.        E’en the same, whom to your arms,
    A noble bride, my father Tyndarus gave.

    MEN. Send forth, O Hecate, thou orb of light,
    Some more benignant spectre.

    HEL.                        You in me
    Behold not one of those who minister
    At Hecate’s abhorred nocturnal rites.

    MEN. Nor am I sure the husband of two wives.

    HEL. Say, to whom else in wedlock are you joined?

    MEN. To her who lies concealed in yonder cave,
    The prize I hither bring from vanquished Troy.

    HEL. You have no wife but me.

    MEN.                          If I retain
    My reason yet, these eyes are sure deceived.

    HEL. Seem you not then, while me you thus behold,
    To view your real consort?

    MEN.                      Though your person
    Resemble hers, no positive decision
    Can I presume to form.

    HEL.                  Observe me well,
    And mark wherein we differ. Who can judge
    With greater certainty than you?

    MEN.                            Thou bear’st
    Her semblance, I confess.

    HEL.                      Who can inform you
    Better than your own eyes?

    MEN.                      What makes me doubt
    Is this; because I have another wife.

    HEL. To the domains of Troy I never went:
    It was my image only.

    MEN.                  Who can fashion
    Such bodies, with the power of sight endued?

    HEL. Composed of ether, you a consort have,
    Heaven’s workmanship.

    MEN.                  Wrought by what plastic god?
    For the events thou speak’st of are most wondrous.

    HEL. Lest Paris should obtain me, this exchange
    Was made by Juno.

    MEN.              How couldst thou be here,
    At the same time, and in the Phrygian realm?

    HEL. The name, but not the body, can be present
    At once in many places.

    MEN.                    O release me;
    For I came hither in an evil hour.

    HEL. Will you then leave me here, and bear away
    That shadow of a wife?

    MEN.                  Yet, O farewell,
    Because thou art like Helen.

    HEL.                        I’m undone:
    For though my husband I again have found,
    Yet shall not I possess him.

    MEN.                        My conviction,
    From all those grievous toils I have endured
    At Ilion, I derive, and not from thee.

    HEL. Ah, who is there more miserable than I am?
    My dearest friends desert me: I, to Greece,
    To my dear native land, shall ne’er return.

MESSENGER, MENELAUS, HELEN, CHORUS.

    MES. After a tedious search, O Menelaus,
    At length have I with difficulty found you,
    But not till over all the wide extent
    Of this barbaric region I had wandered;
    Sent by the comrades whom you left behind.

    MEN. Have ye been plundered then by the barbarians?

    MES. A most miraculous event hath happened,
    Yet less astonishing by far in name
    Than in reality.

    MEN.            Speak, for thou bring’st
    Important tidings by this breathless haste.

    MES. My words are these: in vain have you endured
    Unnumbered toils.

    MEN.              Those thou bewail’st are ills
    Of ancient date. But what hast thou to tell me?

    MES. Borne to the skies your consort from our sight
    Hath vanished, in the heavens is she concealed,
    Leaving the cave in which we guarded her,
    When she these words had uttered: “O ye sons
    Of hapless Phrygia, and of Greece: for me
    Beside Scamander’s conscious stream ye died,
    Through Juno’s arts, because ye falsely deemed
    Helen by Phrygian Paris was possest:
    But after having here remained on earth
    My stated time, observing the decrees
    Of Fate, I to my sire the liquid ether
    Return: but Tyndarus’ miserable daughter,
    Though guiltless, hath unjustly been accused.”
    Daughter of Leda hail! wert thou then here?
    While I as if thou to the starry paths
    Hadst mounted, through my ignorance proclaimed
    Thou from this world on rapid wings wert borne.
    But I no longer will allow thee thus
    To sport with the afflictions of thy friends;
    For in thy cause thy lord and his brave troops
    On Ilion’s coast already have endured
    Abundant toils.

    MEN.            These are the very words
    She uttered; and by what ye both aver
    The truth is ascertained. O happy day
    Which gives thee to my arms!

    HEL.                        My dearest lord,
    O Menelaus, it is long indeed
    Since I have seen you: but joy comes at last.
    My friends, transported I receive my lord
    Whom I once more with these fond arms enfold,
    After the radiant chariot of the sun
    Hath oft the world illumined.

    MEN.                          I embrace
    Thee too: but having now so much to say
    I know not with what subject to begin.

    HEL. Joy raises my exulting crest, these tears
    Are tears of ecstasy, around your neck
    My arms I fling with transport, O my husband,
    O sight most wished for!

    MEN.                    I acquit the Fates,
    Since Jove’s and Leda’s daughter I possess,
    On whom her brothers borne on milk-white steeds
    Erst showered abundant blessings, when the torch
    Was kindled at our jocund nuptial rite;
    Though from my palace her the gods conveyed.
    But evil now converted into good
    To me thy husband hath at length restored
    My long-lost consort: grant, O bounteous Heaven,
    That I these gifts of fortune may enjoy.

    HEL. May you enjoy them, for my vows concur
    With yours; nor, of us two, can one be wretched
    Without the other. O my friends, I groan
    No longer, I no longer shed the tear
    For my past woes: my husband I possess
    Whom I from Troy expected to return
    Full many, many years.

    MEN.                  I still am thine,
    And thee with these fond arms again enfold.
    But oft the chariot of the sun revolved
    Through his diurnal orbit, ere the frauds
    Of Juno I discerned. Yet more from joy
    Than from affliction rise the tears I shed.

    HEL. What shall I say? what mortal could presume
    E’er to have hoped for such a blest event?
    An unexpected visitant once more
    I clasp you to my bosom.

    MEN.                    And I thee
    Who didst appear to sail for Ida’s town,
    And Ilion’s wretched turrets. By the gods,
    Inform me, I conjure thee, by what means
    Thou from my palace hither wert conveyed.

    HEL. Alas! you to the source of all my woes
    Ascend, and search into most bitter tidings.

    MEN. Speak: for whate’er hath been ordained by Heaven
    Ought to be published.

    HEL.                  I abhor the topic
    On which I now am entering.

    MEN.                        Yet relate
    All that thou know’st; for pleasing ’tis to hear
    Of labours that are past.

    HEL.                      I never went
    To that barbarian youth’s adulterous couch
    By the swift oar impelled: but winged love
    Those hapless spousals formed.

    MEN.                          What god, what fate
    Hath torn thee from thy country?

    HEL.                            O my lord,
    The son of Jove hath placed me on the banks
    Of Nile.

    MEN.      With what amazement do I hear
    This wondrous tale of thy celestial guide!

    HEL. Oft have I wept, and still the tear bedews
    These eyes: to Juno, wife of Jove, I owe
    My ruin.

    MEN.      Wherefore wished she to have heaped
    Mischiefs on thee?

    HEL.              Ye sources of whate’er
    To me hath been most dreadful, O ye baths
    And fountains, where those goddesses adorned
    Their rival beauties, from whose influence rose
    That judgment!

    MEN.          Were those curses on thy head
    By Juno showered, that judgment to requite?

    HEL. To rescue me from Venus.

    MEN.                          What thou mean’st
    Inform me.

    HEL.      Who to Paris had engaged——

    MEN. O wretched woman!

    HEL.                  Wretched, wretched me!
    Thus did she waft me to th’ Egyptian coast.

    MEN. Then in thy stead to him that image gave,
    As thou inform’st me.

    HEL.                  But alas! what woes
    Thence visited our wretched house! ah mother!
    Ah me!

    MEN.    What sayst thou?

    HEL.                    Leda is no more.
    Around her neck she fixed the deadly noose
    On my account, through my unhappy nuptials
    O’erwhelmed with foul disgrace.

    MEN.                            Alas! But lives
    Hermione our daughter?

    HEL.                  Yet unwedded,
    Yet childless, O my husband, she bewails
    My miserable ’spousals, my disgrace.

    MEN. O Paris, who hast utterly o’erthrown
    All my devoted house, these curst events,
    Both thee, and myriads of the Grecian troops
    With brazen arms refulgent, have destroyed.

    HEL. But from my country in an evil hour,
    From my loved native city, and from you,
    Me hath the goddess driven, a wretch accursed
    In that I left our home, and bridal bed,
    Which yet I left not, for those base espousals.

    CHOR. If ye hereafter meet with happier fortune,
    This may atone for all ye have endured
    Already.

    MES.      To me too, O Menelaus,
    Communicate a portion of that joy
    Which I perceive, but know not whence it springs.

    MEN. Thou too, old man, shalt in our conference share.

    MES. Was not she then the cause of all the woes
    Endured at Troy?

    MEN.            Not she: we were deceived
    By those immortal Powers, whose plastic hand
    Moulded a cloud into that baleful image.

    MES. What words are these you utter? have we toiled
    In vain, and only for an empty cloud?

    MEN. These deeds were wrought by Juno, and the strife
    ’Twixt the three goddesses.

    MES.                        But is this woman
    Indeed your wife?

    MEN.              E’en she: and thou for this
    On my assertion safely mayst depend.

    MES. My daughter, O how variable is Jove,
    And how inscrutable! for he with ease
    Whirls us around, now here, now there; one suffers
    Full many toils; another, who ne’er knew
    What sorrow was, is swallowed up at once
    In swift perdition, nor in Fortune’s gifts
    A firm and lasting tenure doth enjoy.
    Thou and thy husband have endured a war,
    Of slander thou, but he of pointed spears:
    For by the tedious labours he endured
    He nothing could obtain, but now obtains
    The greatest and the happiest of all boons,
    Which comes to him unsought. Thou hast not shamed
    Thy aged father, and the sons of Jove,
    Nor acted as malignant rumour speaks.
    I now renew thy hymeneal rite,
    And still am mindful of the torch I bore,
    Running before the steeds, when in a car
    Thou with this favoured bridegroom wert conveyed
    From thy paternal mansion’s happy gates.
    For worthless is that servant who neglects
    His master’s interests, nor partakes their joys,
    Nor feels for their afflictions. I was born
    Indeed a slave, yet I with generous slaves
    Would still be numbered, for although the name
    I bear is abject, yet my soul is free.
    Far better this, than if I had at once
    Suffered two evils, a corrupted heart,
    And vile subjection to another’s will.

    MEN. Courage, old man: for thou hast borne my shield,
    And in my cause endured unnumbered toils,
    Sharing my dangers: now partake my joys;
    Go tell the friends I left, what thou hast seen,
    And our auspicious fortunes: on the shore
    Bid them remain, till our expected conflict
    Is finished; and observe how we may sail
    From this loathed coast; that, with our better fortune
    Conspiring, we, if possible, may ’scape
    From these barbarians.

    MES.                  Your commands, O king,
    Shall be obeyed. But I perceive how vain
    And how replete with falsehood is the voice
    Of prophets: no dependence can be placed
    Upon the flames that from the altar rise,
    Or on the voices of the feathered choir.
    It is the height of folly to suppose
    That birds are able to instruct mankind.
    For Calchas, to the host, nor by his words
    Nor signs, declared, “I for a cloud behold
    My friends in battle slain.” The seer was mute,
    And Troy in vain was taken. But perhaps
    You will rejoin, “’Twas not the will of Heaven
    That he should speak.” Why then do we consult
    These prophets? We by sacrifice should ask
    For blessings from the gods, and lay aside
    All auguries. This vain delusive bait
    Was but invented to beguile mankind.
    No sluggard e’er grew rich by divination,
    The best of seers are Prudence and Discernment.

                                          [_Exit_ MESSENGER.

    CHOR. My sentiments on prophets well accord
    With those of this old man. He whom the gods
    Th’ immortal gods befriend, in his own house
    Hath a response that never can mislead.

    HEL. So be it. All thus far is well. But how
    You came with safety, O unhappy man,
    From Troy, ’twill nought avail for me to know;
    Yet with the sorrows of their friends, have friends
    A wish to be acquainted.

    MEN.                    Thou hast asked
    A multitude of questions in one short
    And blended sentence. Why should I recount
    To thee our sufferings on the Ægean deep,
    Those treacherous beacons, by the vengeful hand
    Of Nauplius kindled on Eubœa’s rocks,
    The towns of Crete, or in the Libyan realm,
    Which I have visited, and the famed heights
    Of Perseus? never could my words assuage
    Thy curiosity, and, by repeating
    My woes to thee, I should but grieve the more,
    And yet a second time those sufferings feel.

    HEL. You in your answer have been more discreet
    Than I who such a question did propose.
    But pass o’er all beside, and only tell me
    How long you wandered o’er the briny main.

    MEN. Year after year, besides the ten at Troy,
    Seven tedious revolutions of the sun.

    HEL. The time you speak of, O unhappy man,
    Is long indeed: but from those dangers saved
    You hither come to bleed.

    MEN.                      What words are these?
    What dost thou mean? O, how hast thou undone me!

    HEL. Fly from these regions with your utmost speed:
    Or he to whom this house belongs will slay you.

    MEN. What have I done that merits such a fate?

    HEL. You hither come an unexpected guest,
    And are a hindrance to my bridal rite.

    MEN. Is there a man then who presumes to wed
    My consort?

    HEL.        And with arrogance to treat me,
    Which I, alas! have hitherto endured.

    MEN. Of private rank, in his own strength alone
    Doth he confide, or rules he o’er the land?

    HEL. Lord of this region, royal Proteus’ son.

    MEN. This is the very riddle which I heard
    From yonder female servant.

    HEL.                        At which gate
    Of this barbarian palace did you stand?

    MEN. Here, whence I like a beggar was repelled.

    HEL. What, did you beg for food! ah wretched me!

    MEN. The fact was thus: though I that abject name
    Assumed not.

    HEL.        You then know, it seems, the whole
    About my nuptials.

    MEN.              This I know: but whether
    Thou has escaped th’ embraces of the king
    I still am uninformed.

    HEL.                  That I have kept
    Your bed still spotless, may you rest assured.

    MEN. How canst thou prove the fact? if thou speak truth
    To me, it will give pleasure.

    HEL.                          Do you see,
    Close to the tomb, my miserable seat?

    MEN. I on the ground behold a couch: but what
    Hast thou to do with that, O wretched woman?

    HEL. Here I a suppliant bowed, that I might ’scape
    From those espousals.

    MEN.                  Couldst thou find no altar,
    Or dost thou follow the barbarian mode?

    HEL. Equally with the temples of the gods
    Will this protect me.

    MEN.                  Is not then my bark
    Allowed to waft thee to the Spartan shore?

    HEL. Rather the sword than Helen’s bridal bed
    Awaits you.

    MEN.        Thus should I of all mankind
    Be the most wretched.

    HEL.                  Let not shame prevent
    Your ’scaping from this land.

    MEN.                          And leaving thee,
    For whom I laid the walls of Ilion waste?

    HEL. ’Twere better than to perish in the cause
    Of me your consort.

    MEN.                Such unmanly deeds
    As these thou speak’st of would disgrace the chief
    Who conquered Troy.

    HEL.                You cannot slay the king,
    Which is perhaps the project you have formed.

    MEN. Hath he then such a body as no steel
    Can penetrate?

    HEL.          My reasons you shall know.
    But it becomes not a wise man t’ attempt
    What cannot be performed.

    MEN.                      Shall I submit
    My hands in silence to the galling chain?

    HEL. You know not how to act in these dire straits
    To which we are reduced: but of some plot
    Must we avail ourselves.

    MEN.                    ’Twere best to die
    In some brave action than without a conflict.

    HEL. One only hope of safety yet remains.

    MEN. By gold can it be purchased, or depends it
    On dauntless courage, or persuasive words?

    HEL. Of your arrival if the monarch hear not.

    MEN. Who can inform him? he will never sure
    Know who I am.

    HEL.          He hath a sure associate,
    Within his palace, equal to the gods.

    MEN. Some voice which from its inmost chambers sounds?

    HEL. No: ’tis his sister, her they call Theonoe.

    MEN. She bears indeed a most prophetic name;
    But say, what mighty deeds can she perform?

    HEL. All things she knows, and will inform her brother
    That you are here.

    MEN.              We both, alas! must die,
    Nor can I possibly conceal myself.

    HEL. Could our united supplications move her?

    MEN. To do what action? Into what vain hope
    Wouldst thou mislead me?

    HEL.                    Not to tell her brother
    That you are in the land.

    MEN.                      If we prevail
    Thus far, can we escape from these domains?

    HEL. With ease, if she concur in our design,
    But not without her knowledge.

    MEN.                          This depends
    On thee: for woman best prevails with woman.

    HEL. Around her knees these suppliant hands I’ll twine.

    MEN. Go then; but what if she reject our prayer?

    HEL. You certainly must die; and I by force
    Shall to the king be wedded.

    MEN.                        Thou betray’st me;
    That force thou talk’st of is but mere pretence.

    HEL. But by your head that sacred oath I swear.

    MEN. What sayst thou, wilt thou die, and never change
    Thy husband?

    HEL.        By the self-same sword: my corse
    Shall lie beside you.

    MEN.                  To confirm the words
    Which thou hast spoken, take my hand.

    HEL.                                  I take
    Your hand, and swear that after you are dead
    I will not live.

    MEN.            And I will put an end
    To my existence, if deprived of thee.

    HEL. But how shall we die so as to procure
    Immortal glory?

    MEN.            Soon as on the tomb
    Thee I have slain, myself will I destroy.
    But first a mighty conflict shall decide
    Our claims who to thy bridal bed aspire.
    Let him who dares, draw near: for the renown
    I won at Troy, I never will belie,
    Nor yet returning to the Grecian shore
    Suffer unnumbered taunts for having reft
    Thetis of her Achilles, and beheld
    Ajax the Telamonian hero slain,
    With Neleus’ grandson, though I dare not bleed
    To save my consort. Yet on thy behalf
    Without regret, will I surrender up
    This fleeting life: for if the gods are wise
    They lightly scatter dust upon the tomb.
    Of the brave man who by his foes is slain,
    But pile whole mountains on the coward’s breast.

    CHOR. O may the race of Tantalus, ye gods,
    At length be prosperous, may their sorrows cease!

    HEL. Wretch that I am! for such is my hard fate:
    O Menelaus, we are lost for ever.
    The prophetess Theonoe, from the palace
    Comes forth: I hear the sounding gates unbarred.
    Fly from this spot. But whither can you fly?
    For your arrival here, full well she knows,
    Absent, or present. How, O wretched me,
    Am I undone! in safety you return
    From Troy, from a barbarian land, to rush
    Again upon the swords of fresh barbarians.

THEONOE, MENELAUS, HELEN, CHORUS.

    THEON. [_to one of her Attendants_.]
    Lead thou the way, sustaining in thy hand
    The kindled torch, and fan the ambient air,
    Observing every due and solemn rite,
    That we may breathe the purest gales of Heaven.
    Meanwhile do thou, if any impious foot
    Have marked the path, with lustral flames efface
    The taint, and wave the pitchy brand around,
    That I may pass; and when we have performed
    Our duteous homage to th’ immortal powers,
    Into the palace let the flame be borne,
    Restore it to the Lares. What opinion
    Have you, O Helen, of th’ events foretold
    By my prophetic voice? Your husband comes,
    Your Menelaus in this land appears,
    Reft of his ships, and of your image reft.
    ’Scaped from what dangers, O unhappy man,
    Art thou arrived, although thou know’st not yet
    Whether thou e’er shalt to thy home return,
    Or here remain. For there is strife in Heaven;
    And Jove on thy account this day will hold
    A council; Juno who was erst thy foe,
    Now grown benignant, with thy consort safe
    To Sparta would convey thee, that all Greece
    May understand that the fictitious nuptials
    Of Paris, were the baleful gift of Venus.
    But Venus wants to frustrate thy return,
    Lest she should be convicted, or appear
    At least the palm of beauty to have purchased
    By vending Helen for a wife to Paris.
    But this important question to decide,
    On me depends; I either can destroy thee,
    Which is the wish of Venus, by informing
    My brother thou art here; or save thy life
    By taking Juno’s side, and thy arrival
    Concealing from my brother, who enjoined me
    To inform him whensoe’er thou on these shores
    Shouldst land. Who bears the tidings to my brother,
    That Menelaus’ self is here, to save me
    From his resentment?

    HEL.                At thy knees I fall,
    O virgin, as a suppliant, and here take
    My miserable seat, both for myself,
    And him whom, scarce restored to me, I see
    Now on the verge of death. Forbear t’ inform
    Thy brother, that to these fond arms my lord
    Again is come. O save him, I implore thee;
    Nor gratify thy brother, by betraying
    The feelings of humanity, to purchase
    A wicked and unjust applause: for Jove
    Detests all violence, he bids us use
    What we possess, but not increase our stores
    By rapine. It is better to be poor,
    Than gain unrighteous wealth. For all mankind
    Enjoy these common blessings, Air and Earth;
    Nor ought we our own house with gold to fill,
    By keeping fraudfully another’s right,
    Or seizing it by violence. For Hermes,
    Commissioned by the blest immortal powers,
    Hath, at my cost, consigned me to thy sire,
    To keep me for this husband, who is here
    And claims me back again: but by what means
    Can he receive me after he is dead?
    Or how can the Ægyptian king restore me
    A living consort to my breathless lord?
    Consider therefore, both the will of Heaven
    And that of thy great father. Would the god,
    Would the deceased, surrender up or keep
    Another’s right? I deem they would restore it.
    Hence to thy foolish brother shouldst not thou
    Pay more respect than to thy virtuous sire.
    And sure if thou, a prophetess, who utter’st
    Th’ oracular responses of the gods,
    Break’st through thy father’s justice, to comply
    With an unrighteous brother: it were base
    In thee to understand each mystic truth
    Revealed by the immortal powers, the things
    That are, and those that are not; yet o’erlook
    The rules of justice. But O stoop to save
    Me, miserable me, from all those ills
    In which I am involved; this great exertion
    Of thy benignant aid, my fortunes claim.
    For there is no man who abhors not Helen;
    ’Tis rumoured through all Greece that I betrayed
    My husband, and abode beneath the roofs
    Of wealthy Phrygia. But to Greece once more
    Should I return, and to the Spartan realm;
    When they are told, and see, how to the arts
    Of these contending goddesses they owe
    Their ruin; but that I have to my friends
    Been ever true, they to the rank I held
    ’Midst chaste and virtuous matrons, will restore me:
    My daughter too, whom no man dares to wed,
    From me her bridal portion shall receive;
    And I, no longer doomed to lead the life
    Of an unhappy vagrant, shall enjoy
    The treasures that our palaces contain.
    Had Menelaus died, and been consumed
    In the funereal pyre, I should have wept
    For him far distant in a foreign realm;
    But now shall I for ever be bereft
    Of him who lives, and seem to have escaped
    From every danger. Virgin, act not thus;
    To thee I kneel a suppliant; O confer
    On me this boon, and emulate the justice
    Of your great sire. For fair renown attends
    The children, from a virtuous father sprung,
    Who equal their hereditary worth.

    THEON. Most piteous are the words which you have spoken;
    You also claim my pity: but I wish
    To hear what Menelaus yet can plead
    To save his life.

    MEN.              I cannot at your knees
    Fall prostrate, or with tears these eyelids stain:
    For I should cover all the great exploits
    Which I achieved at Ilion with disgrace,
    If I became a dastard; though some hold
    ’Tis not unworthy of the brave to weep
    When wretched. But this honourable part
    (If such a part can e’er be honourable)
    I will not act, because the prosperous fortunes
    Which erst were mine, are present to my soul.
    If then you haply are disposed to save
    A foreigner who justly claims his wife,
    Restore her, and protect us: if you spurn
    Our suit, I am not now for the first time,
    But have been often wretched, and your name
    Shall be recorded as an impious woman.
    These thoughts, which I hold worthy of myself,
    And just, and such as greatly must affect
    Your inmost heart, I at your father’s tomb
    With energy will utter. Good old man,
    Beneath this marble sepulchre who dwell’st,
    To thee I sue, restore my wife, whom Jove
    Sent hither to thy realm, that thou for me
    Might’st guard her. Thou, I know, since thou art dead,
    Canst ne’er have power to give her back again:
    But she, this holy priestess, will not suffer
    Reproach to fall on her illustrious sire,
    Whom I invoke amid the shades beneath:
    For this depends on her. Thee too I call,
    O Pluto, to my aid, who hast received
    Full many a corse, which fell in Helen’s cause
    Beneath my sword, and still retain’st the prize:
    Either restore them now to life, or force
    Her who seems mightier than her pious father,
    To give me back my wife. But of my consort
    If ye resolve to rob me, I will urge
    Those arguments which Helen hath omitted.
    Know then, O virgin, first I by an oath
    Have bound myself, your brother to encounter,
    And he, or I, must perish; the plain truth
    Is this. But foot to foot in equal combat.
    If he refuse to meet me, and attempt
    To drive us suppliants from the tomb by famine,
    My consort will I slay, and with the sword
    Here on this sepulchre my bosom pierce,
    That the warm current of our blood may stream
    Into the grave. Thus shall our corses lie
    Close to each other on this polished marble:
    To you eternal sorrow shall they cause,
    And foul reproach to your great father’s name.
    For neither shall your brother wed my Helen,
    Nor any man beside: for I with me
    Will bear her; if I cannot bear her home,
    Yet will I bear her to the shades beneath.
    But why complain? If I shed tears, and act
    The woman’s part, I rather shall become
    An object of compassion, than deserve
    To be esteemed a warrior. If you list,
    Slay me, for I can never fall inglorious.
    But rather yield due credence to my words,
    So will you act with justice, and my wife
    Shall I recover.

    CHOR.            To decide the cause
    On which we speak, belongs to thee, O virgin:
    But so decide as to please all.

    THEON.                          By nature
    And inclination am I formed to act
    With piety, myself too I revere:
    Nor will I e’er pollute my sire’s renown,
    Or gratify my brother by such means
    As might make me seem base. For from my birth,
    Hath justice in this bosom fixed her shrine:
    And since from Nereus I inherited
    This temper, Menelaus will I strive
    To save. But now since Juno is disposed
    To be your friend, with her will I accord:
    May Venus be propitious, though her rites
    I never have partaken, and will strive
    For ever to remain a spotless maid.
    But I concur with thee, O Menelaus,
    In all thou to my father at his tomb
    Hast said: for with injustice should I act
    If I restored not Helen: had he lived,
    My sire on thee again would have bestowed
    Thy consort, and her former lord on Helen.
    For vengeance, in the shades of Hell beneath,
    And among all that breathe the vital air,
    Attends on those who break their plighted trust.
    The soul of the deceased, although it live
    Indeed no longer, yet doth still retain
    A consciousness which lasts for ever, lodged
    In the eternal scene of its abode,
    The liquid ether. To express myself
    Concisely, all that you requested me
    Will I conceal, nor with my counsels aid
    My brother’s folly; I to him shall show
    A real friendship, though without the semblance,
    If I his vicious manners can reform
    And make him more religious. Therefore find
    Means to escape yourselves; for I will hence
    Depart in silence. First implore the gods;
    To Venus sue, that she your safe return
    Would suffer; and to Juno, not to change
    The scheme which she hath formed, both to preserve
    Your lord and you. O my departed sire,
    For thee will I exert my utmost might,
    That on thy honoured name no foul reproach
    May ever rest.

                                            [_Exit_ THEONOE.

    CHOR.          No impious man e’er prospered:
    But fairest hopes attend an honest cause.

    HEL. O Menelaus, as to what depends
    Upon the royal maid, are we secure:
    But next doth it become you to propose
    Some means our safety to effect.

    MEN.                            Now listen
    To me; thou in this palace long hast dwelt,
    An inmate with the servants of the king.

    HEL. Why speak you thus? for you raise hopes, as though
    You could do somewhat for our common good.

    MEN. Canst thou prevail on any one of those
    Who guide the harnessed steeds, to furnish us
    With a swift car?

    HEL.              Perhaps I might succeed
    In that attempt. But how shall we escape
    Who to these fields and this barbarian land
    Are strangers? An impracticable thing
    Is this you speak of.

    MEN.                  Well, but in the palace
    Concealed, if with this sword the king I slay.

    HEL. His sister will not suffer this in silence
    If you attempt aught ’gainst her brother’s life.

    MEN. We have no ship in which we can escape;
    For that which we brought hither, by the waves
    Is swallowed up.

    HEL.            Now hear what I propose;
    From woman’s lips if wisdom ever flow.
    Will you permit a rumour of your death
    To be dispersed?

    MEN.            This were an evil omen:
    But I, if any benefit arise
    From such report, consent to be called dead
    While I yet live.

    HEL.              That impious tyrant’s pity
    Our female choir shall move, with tresses shorn,
    And chaunt funereal strains.

    MEN.                        What tendency
    Can such a project have to our deliverance?

    HEL. I will allege that ’tis an ancient custom;
    And of the monarch his permission crave,
    That I on you, as if you in the sea
    Had perished, may bestow a vacant tomb.

    MEN. If he consent, how can this feigned interment
    Enable us to fly without a ship?

    HEL. I will command a bark to be prepared,
    From whence into the bosom of the deep
    Funereal trappings I may cast.

    MEN.                          How well
    And wisely hast thou spoken! but the tomb
    If he direct thee on the strand to raise,
    Nought can this scheme avail.

    HEL.                          But I will say
    ’Tis not the usage, in a Grecian realm,
    With earth to cover the remains of those
    Who perished in the waves.

    MEN.                      Thou hast again
    Removed this obstacle: I then with thee
    Will sail, and the funereal trappings place
    In the same vessel.

    HEL.                ’Tis of great importance
    That you, and all those mariners who ’scaped
    The shipwreck, should be present.

    MEN.                              If we find
    A bark at anchor, with our falchions armed
    In one collected band will we assail
    And board it.

    HEL.          To direct all this, belongs
    To you; but may the prosperous breezes fill
    Our sails, and guide us o’er the billowy deep.

    MEN. These vows shall be accomplished; for the gods
    At length will cause my toils to cease: but whence
    Wilt thou pretend thou heard’st that I was dead?

    HEL. Yourself shall be the messenger; relate
    How you alone escaped his piteous doom,
    A partner of the voyage with the son
    Of Atreus, and the witness of his death.

    MEN. This tattered vest will testify my shipwreck.

    HEL. How seasonable was that which seemed at first
    To be a grievous loss! but the misfortune
    May end perhaps in bliss.

    MEN.                      Must I with thee
    Enter the palace, or before this tomb
    Sit motionless?

    HEL.            Here stay: for if the king
    By force should strive to tear you hence, this tomb
    And your drawn sword will save you. But I’ll go
    To my apartment, shear my flowing hair,
    For sable weeds this snowy vest exchange,
    And rend with bloody nails these livid cheeks:
    For ’tis a mighty conflict, and I see
    These two alternatives: if in my plots
    Detected, I must die; or to my country
    I shall return, and save your life. O Juno,
    Thou sacred queen, who shar’st the couch of Jove,
    Relieve two wretches from their toils; to thee
    Our suppliant arms uplifting high t’wards Heaven
    With glittering stars adorned, thy blest abode,
    We sue: and thou, O Venus, who didst gain
    The palm of beauty through my promised ’spousals,
    Spare me, thou daughter of Dione, spare;
    For thou enough hast injured me already;
    Exposing not my person, but my name,
    To those barbarians; suffer me to die,
    If thou wilt slay me, in my native land.
    Why art thou still insatiably malignant?
    Why dost thou harass me by love, by fraud,
    By the invention of these new deceits,
    And by thy magic philtres plunge in blood
    Our miserable house? If thou hadst ruled
    With mildness, thou to man hadst been most grateful
    Of all the gods. I speak not this at random.

             [HELEN _and_ MENELAUS _retire behind the tomb_.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

              On thee who build’st thy tuneful seat
          Protected by the leafy groves, I call,
          O nightingale, thy accents ever sweet
              Their murmuring melancholy fall
          Prolong! O come, and with thy plaintive strain
              Aid me to utter my distress,
          Thy woes, O Helen, let the song express,
          And those of Troy now levelled with the plain
          By Grecian might. From hospitable shores,
              Relying on barbaric oars,
                The spoiler Paris fled,
          And o’er the deep to Priam’s realm with pride
              Bore his imaginary bride,
              Fancying that thou hadst graced his bed,
        To nuptials fraught with shame by wanton Venus led.

    I. 2.

              Unnumbered Greeks, transpierced with spears,
          Or crushed beneath the falling ramparts, bled:
          Hence with her tresses shorn, immersed in tears
              The matron wails her lonely bed,
          But Nauplius, kindling near th’ Eubœan deep
              Those torches, o’er our host prevailed;
          Though with a single bark the traitor sailed,
          He wrecked whole fleets against Caphareus’ steep,
          And the Ægean coasts, the beacon seemed
              A star, and through Heaven’s conclave gleamed,
                Placed on the craggy height.
        While flushed with conquest, from the Phrygian strand
              They hastened to their native land,
              Portentous source of bloody fight,
        The cloud by Juno formed, beguiled their dazzled sight.

    II. 1.

              Whether the image was divine,
        Drew from terrestrial particles its birth,
        Or from the middle region, how define
              By curious search, ye sons of earth?
        Far from unravelling Heaven’s abstruse intents,
              We view the world tost to and fro,
        Mark strange vicissitudes of joy and woe,
        Discordant and miraculous events.
        Thou, Helen, art indeed the child of Jove.
              The swan, thy sire, inflamed by love,
                To Leda’s bosom flew:
        Yet with imputed crimes malignant fame
              Through Greece arraigns thy slandered name.
              Of men I know not whom to trust,
        But what the gods pronounce have I found ever just.

    II. 2.

              Frantic are ye who seek renown
        Amid the horrors of th’ embattled field,
        Who masking guilt beneath a laurel crown
              With nervous arm the falchion wield,
        Not slaughtered thousands can your fury sate.
              If still success the judgment guide,
        If bloody battle right and wrong decide,
        Incessant strife must vex each rival state:
        Hence from her home departs each Phrygian wife,
              O Helen, when the cruel strife
                Which from thy charms arose,
        One conference might have closed: now myriads dwell
              With Pluto in the shades of Hell,
              And flames, as when Jove’s vengeance throws
        The bolt, have caught her towers and finished Ilion’s woes.

THEOCLYMENUS, CHORUS (HELEN _and_ MENELAUS _behind the tomb_).

    THEOC. Hail, O thou tomb of my illustrious sire!
    For thee have I interred before my gate,
    That with thy shade I might hold frequent conference,
    O Proteus; Theoclymenus thy son
    Thee, O my father, oft as he goes forth,
    Oft as he enters these abodes, accosts.
    But to the palace now convey those hounds
    And nets, my servants. I full many a time
    Have blamed myself, because I never punished
    With death such miscreants; now I am informed
    That publicly some Greek to these domains
    Is come unnoticed by my guards, a spy,
    Or one who means to carry Helen off
    By stealth: but if I seize him, he shall die.
    Methinks I find all over: for the daughter
    Of Tyndarus sits no longer at the tomb,
    But from these shores hath fled, and now is crossing
    The billowy deep. Unbar the gates, bring forth
    My coursers from the stalls, and brazen cars;
    Lest through my want of vigilance the dame
    Whom I would make my consort, should escape me,
    Borne from this land. Yet stay; for I behold
    Those we pursue still here beneath this roof,
    Nor are they fled. Ho! why in sable vest
    Hast thou arrayed thyself, why cast aside
    Thy robes of white, and from thy graceful head
    With ruthless steel thy glowing ringlets shorn,
    And wherefore bathed thy cheek with recent tears?
    Groan’st thou, by visions of the night apprized
    Of some calamity, or hast thou heard
    Within, a rumour that afflicts thy soul?

    HEL. My lord (for I already by that name
    Accost you), I am utterly undone,
    My former bliss is vanished, and I now
    Am nothing.

    THEOC.      Art thou plunged into distress
    So irretrievable? what cruel fate
    Hath overtaken thee?

    HEL.                My Menelaus,
    (Ah, how shall I express myself?) is dead.

    THEOC. Although I must not triumph in th’ event
    Thou speak’st of, yet to me ’tis most auspicious.
    How know’st thou? Did Theonoe tell thee this?

    HEL. She and this mariner, who when he perished
    Was present, both concur in the same tale.

    THEOC. Is there a man arrived, who for the truth
    Of that account can vouch?

    HEL.                      He is arrived:
    And would to Heaven that such auspicious fortune
    As I could wish attended him.

    THEOC.                        Who is he?
    Where is he? I would know the real fact.

    HEL. ’Tis he who stupefied with sorrow sits
    Upon the tomb.

    THEOC.        In what unseemly garb
    Is he arrayed, O Phœbus!

    HEL.                    In that dress,
    Ah me! methinks my husband I behold.

    THEOC. But in what country was the stranger born,
    And whence did he come hither?

    HEL.                          He’s a Greek,
    One of those Greeks who with my husband sailed.

    THEOC. How doth he say that Menelaus died?

    HEL. Most wretchedly, engulfed amid the waves.

    THEOC. Where? as he passed o’er the barbarian seas?

    HEL. Dashed on the rocks of Libya, which affords
    No haven.

    THEOC.    But whence happened it, that he
    This partner of his voyage did not perish?

    HEL. The worthless are more prosperous than the brave.

    THEOC. Where left he the wrecked fragments of his ship
    When he came hither?

    HEL.                There, where would to Heaven
    Perdition had o’ertaken him, and spared
    The life of Menelaus.

    THEOC.                He, it seems,
    Is then no more: but in what bark arrived
    This messenger?

    HEL.            Some sailors, as he says,
    By chance passed by, and snatched him from the waves.

    THEOC. But where’s that hateful pest which in thy stead
    Was sent to Ilion?

    HEL.              Speak you of a cloud,
    Resembling me? it mounted to the skies.

    THEOC. O Priam, for how frivolous a cause
    Thou with thy Troy didst perish!

    HEL.                            In their woes
    I too have been involved.

    THEOC.                    But did he leave
    Thy husband’s corse unburied, or strew dust
    O’er his remains?

    HEL.              He left them uninterred,
    Ah, wretched me!

    THEOC.          And didst thou for this cause
    Sever the ringlets of thy auburn hair?

    HEL. Still is he dear, lodged in this faithful breast

    THEOC. Hast thou sufficient reason then to weep
    For this calamity?

    HEL.              Could you bear lightly
    Your sister’s death?

    THEOC.              No surely. But what means
    Thy still residing at this marble tomb?

    HEL. Why do you harass me with taunting words,
    And why disturb the dead?

    THEOC.                    Because, still constant
    To thy first husband, from my love thou fliest.

    HEL. But I will fly no longer: haste, begin
    The nuptial rite.

    THEOC.            ’Twas long ere thou didst come
    To this: but I such conduct must applaud.

    HEL. Know you then how to act? let us forget
    All that has passed.

    THEOC.              Upon what terms? with kindness
    Should kindness be repaid.

    HEL.                      Let us conclude
    The peace, and O be reconciled.

    THEOC.                          All strife
    With thee I to the winds of heaven consign.

    HEL. Now, since you are my friend, I by those knees
    Conjure you.

    THEOC.      With what object in thy view,
    To me an earnest suppliant dost thou bend?

    HEL. I my departed husband would inter.

    THEOC. What tomb can be bestowed upon the absent
    Wouldst thou inter his shade?

    HEL.                          There is a custom
    Among the Greeks established, that the man
    Who in the ocean perishes——

    THEOC.                        What is it?
    For in such matters Pelops’ race are wise.

    HEL. To bury in their stead an empty vest.

    THEOC. Perform funereal rites, and heap the tomb
    On any ground thou wilt.

    HEL.                    We in this fashion
    Bury not the drowned mariner.

    THEOC.                        How then?
    I am a stranger to the Grecian customs.

    HEL. Each pious gift due to our breathless friends
    We cast into the sea.

    THEOC.                On the deceased
    What presents for thy sake can I bestow?

    HEL. I know not: for in offices like these
    Am I unpractised, having erst been happy.

    THEOC. An acceptable message have you brought,
    O stranger.

    MEN.        Most ungrateful to myself
    And the deceased.

    THEOC.            What funereal rites on those
    Ocean hath swallowed up, do ye bestow?

    MEN. Such honours as each individual’s wealth
    Enables us to pay him.

    THEOC.                Name the cost,
    And for her sake receive whate’er you will.

    MEN. Blood is our first libation to the dead.

    THEOC. What blood? inform me, for with your instructions
    I will comply.

    MEN.          Determine that thyself,
    For whatsoe’er thou giv’st will be sufficient.

    THEOC. The customary victims ’mong barbarians
    Are either horse or bull.

    MEN.                      Whate’er thou giv’st,
    Let it be somewhat princely.

    THEOC.                      My rich herds
    With these are amply furnished.

    MEN.                            And the bier
    Without the corse is borne in solemn state.

    THEOC. It shall: but what is there beside which custom
    Requires to grace the funeral.

    MEN.                          Brazen arms:
    For war was what he loved.

    THEOC.                    We will bestow
    Such presents as are worthy of the race
    Of mighty Pelops.

    MEN.              And those budding flowers
    Th’ exuberant soil produces.

    THEOC.                      But say, how
    And in what manner ye these offerings plunge
    Into the ocean.

    MEN.            We must have a bark
    And mariners to ply the oars.

    THEOC.                        How far
    Will they launch forth the vessel from the strand?

    MEN. So far as from the shore thou scarce wilt see
    The keel divide the waves.

    THEOC.                    But why doth Greece
    Observe this usage?

    MEN.                ’Lest the rising billows
    Cast back to land th’ ablutions.

    THEOC.                          Ye shall have
    A swift Phœnician vessel.

    MEN.                      This were kind,
    And no small favour shown to Menelaus.

    THEOC. Without her presence, cannot you perform
    These rites alone?

    MEN.              Such task or to a mother,
    Or wife, or child, belongs.

    THEOC.                      ’Tis then her duty,
    You say, to bury her departed lord?

    MEN. Sure, piety instructs us not to rob
    The dead of their accustomed dues.

    THEOC.                            Enough:
    On me it is incumbent to promote
    Such virtue in my consort. I will enter
    The palace, and from thence for the deceased
    Bring forth rich ornaments; with empty hands
    You from this region will not I send forth,
    That you may execute what she desires.
    But having brought me acceptable tidings,
    Instead of these vile weeds shall you receive
    A decent garb and food, that to your country
    You may return: for clearly I perceive
    That you are wretched now. But torture not
    Thy bosom with unprofitable cares,
    O hapless woman, for thy Menelaus
    Is now no more, nor can the dead revive.

    MEN. Thee it behoves, O blooming dame, to love
    Thy present husband, and to lay aside
    The fond remembrance of thy breathless lord;
    For such behaviour suits thy fortunes best.
    But if to Greece with safety I return,
    That infamy which erst pursued thy name
    I’ll cause to cease, if thou acquit thyself
    Of these great duties like a virtuous consort.

    HEL. I will; nor shall my husband e’er have cause
    To blame me: you too, who are here, shall witness
    The truth of my assertions. But within
    Go lave your wearied limbs, O wretched man,
    And change your habit; for without delay
    To you will I become a benefactress.
    Hence too with greater zeal will you perform
    The rites my dearest Menelaus claims,
    If all due honours you from me receive.

              [_Exeunt_ THEOCLYMENUS, HELEN, _and_ MENELAUS.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

              O’er mountains erst with hasty tread
              Did the celestial mother stray,
              Nor stop where branching thickets spread,
              Where rapid torrents crossed her way,
        Or on the margin of the billowy deep;
              Her daughter whom we dread to name
        She wept, while hailing that majestic dame,
        Cymbals of Bacchus from the craggy steep
              Sent forth their clear and piercing sound,
              Her car the harnessed dragons drew;
        Following the nymph torn from her virgin crew.
        Amidst her maidens swift of foot were found
              Diana skilled the bow to wield,
              Minerva, who in glittering state
        Brandished the spear and raised her Gorgon shield;
        But Jove looked down from Heaven t’ award another fate.

    I. 2.

              Soon as the mother’s toils were o’er,
              When she had finished her career,
              And sought the ravished maid no more,
              To caves where drifted snows appear,
          By Ida’s nymphs frequented, did she pass,
              And threw herself in sorrow lost,
          On rocks and herbage crusted o’er with frost,
          Despoiled the wasted champaign of its grass,
              Rendered the peasant’s tillage vain,
              Consuming a dispeopled land
          With meagre famine; Spring at her command
          Denied the flocks that sickened on the plain
              The leafy tendrils of the vine;
              Whole cities died, no victims bled,
          No frankincense perfumed Heaven’s vacant shrine;
        Nor burst the current from the Spring’s obstructed head.

    II. 1.

              Then ceased the banquet, wont to charm
              Both gods above and men below:
              The mother’s anger to disarm,
              And mitigate the stings of woe,
          Till in these words Jove uttered his behests:
              “Let each benignant grace attend
          Sweet music’s sympathizing aid to lend,
          And drive corrosive grief from Ceres’ breast
              Indignant for her ravished child:
              Now, O ye Muses, with the lyre
          Join the shrill hymns of your assembled choir,
          The brazen trumpet fill with accents wild,
              And beat the rattling drums amain.”
              Then first of the immortal band,
          Venus with lovely smile approved the strain,
        And raised the deep-toned flute in her enchanting hand.

    II. 2.

              The laws reproved such foul desire,
              Yet ’gainst religion didst thou wed;
              Thy uncle caught love’s baleful fire,
              And rushed to thy incestuous bed.
          Thee shall the mighty mother’s wrath confound,
              Because, through thee, before her shrine
          No victims slain appease the powers divine.
          Great virtue have hinds’ hides, and ivy wound
              Upon a consecrated rod;
              And youths, with virgins in a ring,
        When high from earth with matchless force they spring,
          Loose streams their hair, they celebrate that god
              The Bacchanalian votaries own,
              And waste in dance the sleepless night.
          But thou, confiding in thy charms alone,
        Forgett’st the moon that shines with more transcendent light.

HELEN, CHORUS.

    HEL. Within the palace, O my friends, we prosper
    For Proteus’ royal daughter, in our schemes
    Conspiring when her brother questioned her
    About my lord, no information gave
    Of his arrival: to my interests true
    She said, that cold in death he views no longer
    The radiant sun. But now my lord hath seized
    A vengeful falchion, in that mail designed
    To have been plunged beneath the deep arrayed,
    With nervous arm he lifts an orbed shield,
    In his right hand protended gleams the spear,
    As if with me he was prepared to pay
    To the deceased due homage. Furnished thus
    With brazen arms, he’s ready for the battle,
    And numberless barbarians will subdue
    Unaided, soon as we the ship ascend.
    Exchanging those unseemly weeds which clothe
    The shipwrecked mariner, in splendid robes
    Have I arrayed him, from transparent springs
    The laver filled, and bathed his wearied limbs
    But I must now be silent, for the man
    Who fancies I am ready to become
    His consort, leaves the palace. O my friends,
    In your attachment too I place my trust,
    Restrain your tongues, for we, when saved ourselves,
    If possible will save you from this thraldom.

THEOCLYMENUS, HELEN, MENELAUS, CHORUS.

    THEOC. Go forth, in such procession as the stranger
    Directs you, O my servants, and convey
    These gifts funereal to the briny deep.
    But if thou disapprove not what I say,
    Do thou, O Helen, yield to my persuasions,
    And here remain. For whether thou attend,
    Or art not present at the obsequies
    Of thy departed husband, thou to him
    Wilt show an equal reverence. Much I dread
    Lest hurried on by wild desire thou plunge
    Into the foaming billows, for the sake
    Of him on whom thou doat’st, thy former lord,
    Since thou his doom immoderately bewail’st
    Though he be lost, and never can return.

    HEL. O my illustrious husband, I am bound
    To pay due honours to the man whom first
    I wedded, of our ancient nuptial joys
    A memory still retaining, for so well
    I loved my lord that I could even die
    With him. But what advantage would result
    To the deceased, should I lay down my life?
    Yet let me go myself, and to his shade
    Perform each solemn rite. But may the gods,
    On you, and on the stranger who assists me
    In this my pious task, with liberal hand
    Confer the gifts I wish. But you in me
    Shall such a consort to your palace bear
    As you deserve, to recompense your kindness
    To me and Menelaus. Such events
    In some degree are measured by the will
    Of Fortune: but give orders for a ship
    To be prepared, these trappings to convey,
    So shall your purposed bounty be complete.

    THEOC. [_to one of his Attendants._]
    Go thou, and furnish them a Tyrian bark
    Of fifty oars, with skilful sailors manned.

    HEL. But may not he who decorates the tomb
    Govern the ship?

    THEOC.          My sailors must to him
    Yield an implicit deference.

    HEL.                        This injunction
    Repeat, that they may clearly understand it.

    THEOC. A second time, will I, and yet a third,
    Issue this self-same mandate, if to thee
    This can give pleasure.

    HEL.                    May the gods confer
    Blessings on you, and prosper my designs!

    THEO. Waste not thy bloom with unavailing tears.

    HEL. To you this day my gratitude will prove.

    THEOC. All these attentions to the dead are nought
    But unavailing toil.

    HEL.                My pious care
    Not to those only whom the silent grave
    Contains, but to the living too extends.

    THEOC. In me thou mayst expect to find a husband
    Who yields not to the Spartan Menelaus.

    HEL. I censure not your conduct, but bewail
    My own harsh destiny.

    THEOC.                Bestow thy love
    On me, and prosperous fortunes shall return.

    HEL. It is a lesson I have practised long,
    To love my friends.

    THEOC.              Shall I my navy launch,
    To join in these funereal rites?

    HEL.                            Dread lord,
    Pay not unseemly homage to your vassals.

    THEOC. Well! I each sacred usage will allow
    Practised by Pelops’ race, for my abodes
    Are undefiled with blood: thy Menelaus
    In Ægypt died not. But let some one haste
    And bid the nobles bear into my house
    The bridal gifts: for the whole earth is bound
    To celebrate in one consenting hymn
    My blest espousals with the lovely Helen.
    But go, embark upon the briny main,
    O stranger, and as soon as ye have paid
    All decent homage to her former lord
    Bring back my consort hither: that with me
    When you have feasted at our nuptial rite
    You to your native mansion may return,
    Or here continue in a happy state.

                                       [_Exit_ THEOCLYMENUS.

    MEN. O Jove, thou mighty father, who art called
    A god supreme in wisdom, from thy heaven
    Look down, and save us from our woes: delay not
    To aid us: for we drag the galling yoke
    Of sorrow and mischance: if with thy finger
    Thou do but touch us, we shall soon attain
    The fortune which we wish for, since the toils
    We have endured already are sufficient.
    Ye gods, I now invoke you, from my mouth
    So shall ye hear full many joyful accents
    Mixed with these bitter plaints: for I deserve not
    To be for ever wretched; but to tread
    At length secure. O grant me this one favour,
    And make my future life completely blest.

                             [_Exeunt_ MENELAUS _and_ HELEN.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

        Swift bark of Sidon, by whose dashing oars
        Divided oft, the frothy billows rise,
        Propitious be thy voyage from these shores:
            In thy train the dolphins play,
            O’er the deep thou lead’st the way,
        While motionless its placid surface lies.
            Soon as Serenity the fair,
            That azure daughter of the main,
            Shall in this animating strain
        Have spoken: “To the gentle breeze of air
            Expand each undulating sail,
            Row briskly on before the gale,
        Ye mariners, in Perseus’ ancient seat
            Till Helen rest her wearied feet.”

    I. 2.

        Those sacred nymphs shall welcome thy return
        Who guard the portals of Minerva’s fane
        Or speed the current from its murmuring urn:
            Choral dances of delight
            That prolong the jocund night,
        At Hyacinthus’ banquet shalt thou join,
            Fair stripling, whom with luckless hand
            Unwitting did Apollo slay
            At games that crowned the festive day,
        Hurling his quoit on the Laconian strand;
            To him Jove’s son due honours paid:
            At Sparta too, that lovely maid
        Shalt thou behold, whom there thou left’st behind,
            Still to celibacy consigned.

    II. 1.

        O might we cleave the air, like Libyan cranes,
        Who fly in ranks th’ impending wintry storm;
        When their shrill leader bids them quit the plains,
            They the veteran’s voice obey,
            O’er rich harvests wing their way,
        Or where parched wastes th’ unfruitful scene deform.
            With lengthened neck, ye feathered race
            Who skim the clouds in social band,
            Where the seven Pleiades expand
        Their radiance, and Orion heaves his mace,
            This joyous embassy convey
            As near Eurotas’ banks ye stray;
        That Menelaus to his subject land
            Victorious comes from Phrygia’s strand.

    II. 2.

        Borne in your chariot down th’ ethereal height,
        At length, ye sons of Tyndarus, appear,
        While vibrates o’er your heads the starry light:
            Habitants of heaven above,
            Now exert fraternal love,
        If ever Helen to your souls was dear,
            A calm o’er th’ azure ocean spread,
            Bridle the tempests of the main,
            Propitious gales from Jove obtain,
        Your sister snatch from the barbarian’s bed:
            Commenced on Ida’s hill, that strife,
            Embittered with reproach her life,
        Although she never viewed proud Ilion’s tower
            Reared by Apollo’s matchless power.

THEOCLYMENUS, MESSENGER, CHORUS.

    MES. O king, I have discovered in the palace,
    Events most inauspicious: what fresh woes
    Is it my doleful office to relate!

    THEOC. Say what hath happened?

    MES.                          Seek another wife,
    For Helen hath departed from this realm.

    THEOC. Borne through the air on wings, or with swift foot
    Treading the ground?

    MES.                Her o’er the briny main
    From Ægypt’s shores, hath Menelaus wafted,
    Who came in person with a feigned account
    Of his own death.

    THEOC.            O dreadful tale! what ship
    From these domains conveys her? thou relat’st
    Tidings the most incredible.

    MES.                        The same
    You to that stranger gave, and in one word
    To tell you all, he carries off your sailors.

    THEOC. How is that possible? I wish to know:
    For such an apprehension never entered
    My soul, as that one man could have subdued
    The numerous band of mariners, with whom
    Thou wert sent forth.

    MES.                  When from the royal mansion
    Jove’s daughter to the shore was borne, she trod
    With delicate and artful step, pretending
    To wail her husband’s loss, though he was present,
    And yet alive. But when we reached the haven,
    Sidonia’s largest vessel we hauled forth,
    Furnished with benches, and with fifty oars;
    But a fresh series of incessant toil
    Followed this toil; for while one fixed the mast,
    Another ranged the oars, and with his hand
    The signal gave, the sails were bound together,
    Then was the rudder fastened to the stern
    With thongs, cast forth: while they observed us busied
    In such laborious task, the Grecian comrades
    Of Menelaus to the shore advanced,
    Clad in their shipwrecked vestments. Though their form
    Was graceful, yet their visages were squalid:
    But Atreus’ son, beholding their approach,
    Under the semblance of a grief that masked
    His treacherous purpose, in these words addressed them:
    “How, O ye wretched sailors, from what bark
    Of Greece that hath been wrecked upon this coast
    Are ye come hither? will ye join with us
    In the funereal rites of Menelaus,
    Whom Tyndarus’s daughter, to an empty tomb
    Consigns, though absent?” Simulated tears
    They shed, and went aboard the ship, conveying
    The presents to be cast into the sea
    For Menelaus. But to us these things
    Appeared suspicious, and we made remarks
    Among ourselves upon the numerous band
    Of our intruding passengers; but checked
    Our tongues from speaking openly, through deference
    To your commands. For when you to that stranger
    Trusted the guidance of the ship, you caused
    This dire confusion. All beside, with ease
    Had we now lodged aboard, but could not force
    The sturdy bull t’ advance; he bellowing rolled
    His eyes around, bending his back and low’ring
    Betwixt his horns, nor dared we to approach
    And handle him. But Helen’s husband cried:
    “O ye who laid Troy waste, will ye forget
    To act like Greeks? why scruple ye to seize
    And on your youthful shoulders heave the beast
    Up to the rising prow, a welcome victim
    To the deceased?” His falchion, as he spoke,
    The warrior drew. His summons they obeyed,
    Seized the stout bull, and carried him aboard:
    But Menelaus stroked the horse’s neck
    And face, and with this gentle usage led him
    Into the bark. At length when all its freight
    The vessel had received, with graceful foot
    Helen, the steps ascending, took her seat
    On the mid deck; and Menelaus near her,
    E’en he who they pretended was no more.
    But some on the right side, and on the left
    Others in equal numbers, man to man
    Opposed, their station took, their swords concealing
    Beneath their garments. We distinctly heard
    The clamorous sailors animate each other
    To undertake the voyage. But from land
    When a convenient distance we had steered,
    The pilot asked this question: “Shall we sail,
    O stranger, any farther from the coast,
    Or is this right? for ’tis my task to guide
    The vessel.” He replied: “Enough for me.”
    Then seized with his right hand the falchion, leaped
    Upon the prow, and standing o’er the bull
    The victim (without mentioning the name
    Of any chief deceased; but as he drove
    The weapon through his neck) thus prayed: “O Neptune,
    Who in the ocean dwell’st, and ye chaste daughters
    Of Nereus, to the Nauplian shore convey
    Me and my consort, from this hostile land,
    In safety.” But a crimson tide of blood,
    Auspicious to the stranger, stained the waves;
    And some exclaimed: “There’s treachery in this voyage,
    Let us sail homewards, issue thy commands,
    And turn the rudder.” But the son of Atreus,
    Who had just slain the bull, to his companions
    Called loudly: “Why delay, O ye the flower
    Of Greece, to smite, to slaughter those barbarians,
    And cast them from the ship into the waves?”
    But to your sailors our commander spoke
    A different language: “Will not some of you
    Tear up a plank, or with a shattered bench,
    Or ponderous oar, upon the bleeding heads
    Of those audacious foreigners our foes,
    Impress the ghastly wound?” But on their feet
    All now stood up; our hands with nautic poles
    Were armed, and theirs with swords: a tide of slaughter
    Ran down the ship. But Helen from the poop
    The Greeks encouraged; “Where is the renown
    Ye gained at Troy? display ’gainst these barbarians
    The same undaunted prowess.” In their haste
    Full many fell, some rose again, the rest
    Might you have seen stretched motionless in death.
    But Menelaus, sheathed in glittering mail,
    Wherever his confederates he descried
    Hard pressed, rushed thither with his lifted sword,
    Driving us headlong from the lofty deck
    Into the waves, and forced your mariners
    To quit their oars. But the victorious king
    Now seized the rudder, and to Greece declared
    He would convey the ship: they hoisted up
    The stately mast: propitious breezes came;
    They left the land: but I from death escaping,
    Let myself gently down into the waves
    Borne on the cordage which sustains the anchor;
    My strength began to fail, when some kind hand
    Threw forth a rope, and brought me safe ashore,
    That I to you these tidings might convey.
    There’s nought more beneficial to mankind
    Than wise distrust.

    CHOR.              I never could have thought
    That Menelaus who was here, O king,
    Could have imposed so grossly or on you
    Or upon us.

    THEOC.      Wretch that I am, ensnared
    By woman’s treacherous arts! the lovely bride
    I hoped for, hath escaped me. If the ship
    Could be o’ertaken by our swift pursuit,
    My wrongs would urge me with vindictive hand
    To seize the strangers. But I now will punish
    That sister who betrayed me; in my house
    Who when she saw the Spartan Menelaus,
    Informed me not: she never shall deceive
    Another man by her prophetic voice.

    CHOR. Ho! whither, O my sovereign, would you go,
    And for what bloody purpose?

    THEOC.                      Where the voice
    Of rigid justice summons me. Retire,
    And stand aloof.

    CHOR.            Yet will not I let loose
    Your garment; for you hasten to commit
    A deed most mischievous.

    THEOC.                  Wouldst thou, a slave,
    Govern thy lord?

    CHOR.            Here reason’s on my side.

    THEOC. That shall not I allow, if thou refuse
    To quit thy hold.

    CHOR.            I will not then release you.

    THEOC. To slay that worst of sisters.

    CHOR.                                That most pious.

    THEOC. Her who betrayed me.

    CHOR.                      Glorious was the fraud
    That caused so just a deed.

    THEOC.                      When she bestowed
    My consort on another.

    CHOR.                  On the man
    Who had a better claim——

    THEOC.                    But who is lord
    Of what belongs to me?

    CHOR.                  Who from her sire
    Received her.

    THEOC.        She by Fortune was bestowed
    On me.

    CHOR.    But ta’en away again by Fate.

    THEOC. Thou hast no right to judge of my affairs.

    CHOR. If I but speak to give you better counsels.

    THEOC. I am thy subject then, and not thy king.

    CHOR. For having acted piously, your sister
    I vindicate.

    THEOC.      Thou seem’st to wish for death.

    CHOR. Kill me. Your sister you with my consent
    Shall never slay; I rather would yield up
    My life on her behalf. It is most glorious
    To generous servants for their lords to die.

CASTOR _and_ POLLUX, THEOCLYMENUS, CHORUS.

    CAS. _and_ POL. Restrain that ire that hurries thee away
    Beyond the bounds of reason, O thou king
    Of Ægypt’s realm; and listen to the voice
    Of us twin sons of Jove, whom Leda bore
    Together with that Helen who is fled
    From thy abodes. Thou rashly hast indulged
    Thine anger, for the loss of her whom Fate
    Ne’er destined to thy bed. Nor hath thy sister
    Theonoe, from th’ immortal Nereid sprung,
    To thee done any injury; she reveres
    The gods, and her great father’s just behests.
    For till the present hour, was it ordained
    That Helen in thy palace should reside:
    But when Troy’s walls were from their bases torn,
    And she had to the rival goddesses
    Furnished her name, no longer was it fit
    That she should for thy nuptials be detained,
    But to her ancient home return, and dwell
    With her first husband. In thy sister’s breast
    Forbear to plunge the sword, and be convinced
    That she in this affair hath acted wisely.
    We long ere this our sister had preserved,
    Since Jove hath made us gods, but were too weak
    At once to combat the behests of Fate,
    And the immortal powers, who had ordained
    That these events should happen. This to thee,
    O Theoclymenus, I speak. These words
    Next to my lovely sister, I address;
    Sail with your husband, for a prosperous breeze
    Your voyage shall attend. We your protectors
    And your twin brothers, on our coursers borne
    Over the waves, will guide you to your country,
    But after you have finished life’s career,
    You shall be called a goddess, shall partake
    With us the rich oblations, and receive
    The gifts of men: for thus hath Jove decreed.
    But where the son of Maia placed you first,
    When he had borne you from the Spartan realm,
    And formed by stealth from the aërial mansions
    An image of your person, to prevent
    Paris from wedding you, there is an isle
    Near the Athenian realm, which men shall call
    Helen in future times, because that spot
    Received you, when in secrecy conveyed
    From Sparta. The Heavens also have ordained
    The wanderer Menelaus shall reside
    Among the happy islands. For the gods
    To those of nobler minds no hatred bear;
    At their command though grievous toil await
    The countless multitude.

    THEOC.                    Ye sons of Jove
    And Leda, I the contest will decline
    Which I at first so violently urged,
    Hoping your lovely sister to obtain,
    And my own sister’s life resolve to spare:
    Let Helen to her native shores return,
    If ’tis the will of Heaven: but be assured,
    The same high blood ye spring from with the best
    And chastest sister: hail then, for the sake
    Of Helen with a lofty soul endued,
    Such as in female bosoms seldom dwells.

    CHOR. A thousand shapes our varying fates assume
    The gods perform what least we could expect,
    And oft the things for which we fondly hoped
    Come not to pass; but Heaven still finds a clue
    To guide our steps through life’s perplexing maze,
    And thus doth this important business end.




ANDROMACHE.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

    ANDROMACHE.
    ATTENDANT.
    CHORUS OF PHTHIAN WOMEN.
    HERMIONE.
    MENELAUS.
    MOLOSSUS.
    PELEUS.
    NURSE OF HERMIONE.
    ORESTES.
    MESSENGER.
    THETIS.


SCENE.—THE VESTIBULE OF THETIS’ TEMPLE BETWEEN PHTHIA AND PHARSALIA IN
THESSALY.

ANDROMACHE.

    O Thebes, thou pride of Asia, from whose gate
    I came resplendent with a plenteous dower,
    To Priam’s regal house, the fruitful wife
    Of Hector: his Andromache was erst
    An envied name: but now am I more wretched
    Than any woman, or already born,
    Or to be born hereafter; for I saw
    My husband Hector by Achilles slain,
    And that unhappy son whom to my lord
    I bore, Astyanax, from Troy’s high towers
    Thrown headlong; when our foes had sacked the city,
    Myself descended from a noble line
    Of freeborn warriors, reached the Grecian coast,
    On Neoptolemus that island prince
    For the reward of his victorious arms
    Bestowed: selected from the Phrygian spoils.
    ’Twixt Phthia and Pharsalia, in these fields,
    I dwell, where Thetis from the haunts of men
    Retreating, with her Peleus erst abode.
    By Thessaly’s inhabitants, this spot
    Is from th’ auspicious nuptials of that goddess
    Called Thetidæum: here Achilles’ son
    Residing, suffers Peleus still to rule
    Pharsalia’s land, nor will assume the sceptre
    While lives his aged grandsire. In these walls
    A son, who to th’ embraces of my lord
    Achilles’ offspring, owes his birth, I bore,
    And though I had been wretched, a fond hope
    Still cherished, that while yet the boy was safe
    I some protection and relief might find
    In my calamities; but since my lord
    (Spurning my servile couch) that Spartan dame
    Hermione espoused, with ruthless hate
    By her am I pursued; for she pretends
    That I, by drugs endued with magic power,
    Administered in secret, make her barren
    And odious to her lord, because I wish
    To occupy this mansion in her stead,
    And forcibly to drive her from his couch,
    To which, at first I with reluctance came,
    But now have left it: mighty Jove can witness
    That I became the partner of his bed
    Against my own consent. But she remains
    Deaf to conviction, and attempts to slay me:
    In this design her father Menelaus
    Assists his daughter, he is now within,
    And on such errand left the Spartan realm:
    Fearing his rage, I near the palace take
    My seat, in Thetis’ temple, that the goddess
    From death may save me; for both Peleus’ self,
    And the descendants of that monarch, hold
    This structure reared in memory of his wedlock
    With the fair Nereid, in religious awe.
    But hence, in secret, trembling for his life,
    My only child have I conveyed away,
    Because his noble father is not present
    To aid me, and avails not now to guard
    His son, while absent in the Delphic land,
    To expiate there the rage with which he sought
    The Pythian tripod, and from Phœbus claimed
    A reparation for his father’s death.
    If haply he can deprecate the curses
    Attendant on his past misdeeds, and make
    The god propitious to his future days.

FEMALE ATTENDANT, ANDROMACHE.

    ATT. My queen, for still I scruple not to use
    The same respectful title which I gave you
    When we in Ilion dwelt; you and your lord
    While he was living, shared my duteous love,
    And now I with important tidings fraught
    To you am come, trembling indeed lest one
    Of our new rulers overhear the tale,
    Yet greatly pitying your disastrous fate:
    For Menelaus and his daughter form
    Dire plots against you; of these foes beware.

    AND. O my dear fellow-servant (for thou shar’st
    Her bondage who was erst thy queen, but now
    Is wretched), ah! what mean they? what fresh schemes
    Have they devised to take away my life,
    Who am by woes encompassed?

    ATT.                        They intend,
    O miserable dame, to kill your son,
    Whom privately you from this house conveyed.

    AND. Are they informed I sent the child away?
    Ah me! who told them? in what utter ruin
    Am I involved!

    ATT.          I know not; but thus much
    Of their designs I heard; in quest of him
    Is Menelaus from these doors gone forth.

    AND. Then am I lost indeed: for, O my child,
    These two relentless vultures mean to seize thee,
    And take away thy life, while he who bears
    A father’s name, at Delphi still remains.

    ATT. You had not fared so ill, I am convinced,
    If he were present, but now every friend
    Deserts you.

    AND.        Is there not a rumour spread
    Of Peleus’ coming?

    ATT.              He, though he were here,
    Is grown too old to aid you.

    AND.                        More than once
    I sent to him.

    ATT.          Suppose you that he heeds
    None of your messengers?

    AND.                    What means this question?
    Wilt thou accept such office?

    ATT.                          What pretext
    To colour my long absence from this house
    Shall I allege?

    AND.            Full many are the schemes
    Which thou, who art a woman, can devise.

    ATT. ’Twere dangerous; for Hermione is watchful.

    AND. Dost thou perceive the danger, and renounce
    Thy friends in their distress?

    ATT.                          Not thus: forbear
    To brand me with so infamous a charge:
    I go; for of small value is the life
    (Whate’er befall me) of a female slave.

                                          [_Exit_ ATTENDANT.

    AND. Proceed: meanwhile I to the conscious air
    Those plaints and bitter wailings will repeat,
    On which I ever dwell. Unhappy women
    Find comfort in perpetually talking
    Of what they suffer. But my groans arise
    Not from one ill, but many ills: the walls
    Of my loved country razed, my Hector slain,
    And that hard fortune, in whose yoke bound fast,
    Thus am I fallen into th’ unseemly state
    Of servitude. We never ought to call
    Frail mortals happy, at their latest hour
    Till we behold them to the shades descend.

ELEGY.

    In Helen sure, to Troy’s imperial towers
      Young Paris wafted no engaging bride,
    But when he led her to those nuptial bowers,
      Some fiend infernal crossed the billowy tide.

    With brandished javelin and devouring flame,
      For her the Grecian warriors to thy shore,
    O Ilion, in a thousand vessels came,
      And drenched thy smould’ring battlements with gore.

    Around the walls, my Hector, once thy boast,
      Fixed to his car, was by Achilles borne,
    And from my chamber hurried to the coast
      I veiled my head in servitude forlorn.

    Much wept these streaming eyes, when in the dust
      My city, palace, husband, prostrate lay.
    Subject to fierce Hermione’s disgust,
      Why should I still behold the hated day?

    Harassed with insults from that haughty dame,
      Round Thetis’ bust my suppliant arms I fling,
    And here with gushing tears bewail my shame,
      As from the rock bursts forth the living spring.

CHORUS, ANDROMACHE.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          O thou, who seated in this holy space,
        Hast Thetis’ temple thy asylum made,
            Though Phthia gave me birth, to aid
        Thee, hapless dame of Asiatic race,
        I hither come; would I from direful harms
                Could guard, could heal the strife
              ’Twixt thee and that indignant wife
        Hermione, whom ruthless discord arms
        To punish thee the rival of her charms,
              A captive, to the genial bed,
              Who by Achilles’ son wert led.

    I. 2.

          Aware of fate, th’ impending evil weigh,
        A helpless Phrygian nymph, thou striv’st in vain
            ’Gainst her of Sparta’s proud domain:
        Cease, to this sea-born goddess, cease to pray,
        And at her blazing shrine no longer stay:
                For how can it avail
              To thee with hopeless sorrow pale
        To suffer all thy beauties to decay,
        Because thy rulers with oppression sway?
              Thou to superior might must bend.
              Why, feeble as thou art, contend?

    II. 1.

          Yet hasten from the Nereid’s lofty seat,
        Consider that thou tread’st a foreign plain,
              And that these hostile walls detain
        In strictest bondage thy reluctant feet,
        Here none of all those friends, that numerous band,
              Who shared thy greatness, is at hand,
              To cheer thee in these days of shame,
                O wretched, wretched dame.

    II. 2.

          A miserable matron thou art come
        From Troy to our abodes, unwilling guest;
              Though mine the sympathizing breast,
        Yet I through reverence to our lords am dumb,
        Lest she, who springs from Helen, child of Jove,
              Should be a witness of that love
              Which I to thee whose griefs I share,
                Impelled by pity bear.

HERMIONE, ANDROMACHE, CHORUS.

    HER. The gorgeous ornaments of gold, these brows
    Encircling, and the tissued robes I wear,
    I from Achilles’, or from Peleus’ stores,
    As chosen presents when I hither came,
    Received not, but from Sparta’s realm, these gifts
    My father Menelaus hath bestowed
    With a large dower, that I might freely speak
    Such is the answer which to you I make,
    O Phthian dames. But thou, who art a slave
    And captive, wouldst in these abodes usurp
    Dominion, and expel me; to my lord
    Thy drugs have made me odious, hence ensues
    My barrenness: the Asiatic dames,
    For these abhorred devices are renowned;
    But thee will I subdue, nor shall this dome
    Of the immortal Nereid, nor her altar
    Or temple save thee from impending death;
    If either man or god should be disposed
    To rescue thee, ’twere fit, that to atone
    For the proud thoughts thou in thy happier days
    Didst nourish, thou shouldst tremble, at my knees
    Fall low, and sweep the pavement of my house,
    Sprinkling the waters from a golden urn.
    Know where thou art: no Hector governs here,
    No Phrygian Priam doth this sceptre wield;
    This is no Chrysa, but a Grecian city.
    Yet thou, O wretched woman, art arrived
    At such a pitch of madness, that thou dar’st
    To sleep e’en with the son of him who slew
    Thy husband, and a brood of children bear
    To him whose hands yet reek with Phrygian gore,
    Such is the whole abhorred barbarian race;
    The father with his daughter, the vile son
    With his own mother, with her brother too
    The sister, sins, friends by their dearest friends
    Are murdered; deeds like these no wholesome law
    Prohibits: introduce not among us
    Such crimes, for ’tis unseemly that one man
    Possess two women; the fond youth who seeks
    Domestic harmony, confines his love
    To one fair partner of the genial bed.

    CHOR. The female sex are envious, and pursue
    With an incessant hatred those who share
    Their nuptial joys.

    AND.                Alas! impetuous youth
    Proves baleful to mankind, and there are none
    Who act with justice in their blooming years.
    But what I dread is this, lest slavery curb
    My tongue, though I have many truths to utter:
    In this dispute with you, if I prevail,
    That very triumph may become my bane:
    For those of haughty spirits ill endure
    The most prevailing arguments when urged
    By their inferiors. Yet my better cause
    I will not thus betray. Say, youthful princess,
    What reasons of irrefragable force
    Enable me to drive you from the couch
    Of your own lawful husband? to the Phrygians
    Is Sparta grown inferior, and hath fortune
    On us conferred the palm? Do you behold me
    Still free? elate with youth, a vigorous frame,
    The wide extent of empire I possess,
    And number of my friends, am I desirous
    To occupy these mansions in your stead,
    That in your stead I might bring forth a race
    Of slaves, th’ appendages of my distress?
    Will any one endure (if you produce
    No children) that my sons should be the kings
    Of Phthia?—the Greeks love me for the sake
    Of Hector, I too was forsooth obscure,
    And not a queen, in Troy. Your husband’s hate,
    Not from my drugs, but from your soul, unsuited
    For social converse, springs: there is a philtre
    To gain his love. Not beauty, but the virtues,
    O woman, to the partners of our bed
    Afford delight. But if it sting your pride
    That Sparta’s a vast city, while you treat
    Scyros with scorn, amidst the poor, display
    Your riches, and of Menelaus speak
    As greater than Achilles; hence your lord
    Abhors you. For a woman, though bestowed
    On a vile mate, should learn to yield, nor strive
    For the pre-eminence. In Thrace o’erspread
    With snow, if you were wedded to a king,
    Who to his bed takes many various dames,
    Would you have slain them? you would cast disgrace
    On your whole sex by such unsated lust;
    Base were the deed: for though our souls are warmed
    With more intense desires than those of men
    We modestly conceal them. For thy sake
    I, O my dearest Hector, loved the objects
    Of thy affections, whene’er Venus’ wiles
    Caused thee to err, and at my breast full oft
    Nourished thy spurious children, that in nought
    Thy joys I might embitter: acting thus
    I won him by my virtues. But you tremble
    E’en if the drops of Heaven’s transparent dew
    Rest on your husband. Strive not to transcend
    Your mother in a wild excess of love,
    O woman. For the children, if endued
    With reason, such examples should avoid
    Of those who bore them, as corrupt the soul.

    CHOR. As far as possible, O queen, comply
    With my advice, and in mild terms accost her.

    HER. What mean’st thou by this arrogance of speech,
    This vain debate, as if thou still wert chaste,
    And I had strayed from virtue’s path?

    AND.                                  The words
    You have been using, now at least are void
    Of modesty.

    HER.        O woman, may this breast
    Harbour no soul like thine.

    AND.                        Though bashful youth
    Glow on your cheek, indecent is your language.

    HER. Thou by thy actions more than by thy words
    Hast proved the malice which to me thou bear’st.

    AND. Why will you not conceal th’ inglorious pangs
    Of jealous love?

    HER.            What woman but resents
    Such wrongs, and deems them great?

    AND.                              The use some make
    Of these misfortunes adds to their renown:
    But shame waits those who are devoid of wisdom.

    HER. We dwell not in a city where prevail
    Barbarian laws.

    AND.            In Phrygia or in Greece
    Base actions are with infamy attended.

    HER. Though most expert in every subtle art,
    Yet die thou must.

    AND.              Behold you Thetis’ image
    Turning its eyes on you?

    HER.                    She loathes thy country
    Where her Achilles treacherously was slain.

    AND. Your mother Helen caused his death, not I.

    HER. Wouldst thou retrace still farther the sad tale
    Of our misfortunes?

    AND.                I restrain my tongue.

    HER. Speak to me now on that affair which caused
    My coming hither.

    AND.              All I say is this:
    You have not so much wisdom as you need.

    HER. From this pure temple of the sea-born goddess
    Wilt thou depart?

    AND.              Not while I live: you first
    Must slay, then drag me hence.

    HER.                          I am resolved
    How to proceed, and wait my lord’s return
    No longer.

    AND.      Nor will I before he come
    Surrender up myself.

    HER.                With flaming brands
    Hence will I drive thee, and no deference pay
    To thy entreaties.

    AND.              Kindle them; the gods
    Will view the deed.

    HER.                The scourge too is prepared.

    AND. Transpierce this bosom, deluge with my gore
    The altar of the goddess, you by her
    Shall be at length o’ertaken.

    HER.                          From thy cradle,
    Trained up and hardened in barbarian pride,
    Canst thou endure to die? from this asylum
    Soon will I rouse thee by thy own consent,
    I with such baits am furnished, but conceal
    My purpose, which th’ event itself ere long
    Will make conspicuous. Keep a steady seat,
    For though by molten lead thou wert enclosed
    Hence would I rouse thee, ere Achilles’ son,
    Whom thou confid’st in, to this land return.

                                           [_Exit_ HERMIONE.

    AND. In him I place my still unshaken trust.
    Yet is it strange that the celestial powers,
    To heal the serpent’s venom, have assigned
    Expedients, but no remedy devised
    Against an evil woman who surpasses
    Or vipers’ stings or the consuming flame:
    Thus baleful is our influence on mankind.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

          The winged son of Maia and of Jove
          To many sorrowful events gave birth,
          And scattered discord o’er the bleeding earth,
          When he through sacred Ida’s piny grove
          Guided the car of three immortal dames,
          (The golden prize of beauty to obtain,
          In hateful strife engaged, who urged their claims);
        To where in his mean hut abode a lonely swain.

    I. 2.

          No sooner had they reached the destined bower,
          Than in the limpid spring her snowy frame
          Each goddess laved; to Priam’s son then came
          With artful speeches of such winning power
          As might beguile the rash and amorous boy:
          Venus prevailed; her words, though sweet their sound,
          Proved of destructive consequence to Troy,
        Whose stately bulwarks hence lie levelled with the ground.

    II. 1.

          When new-born Paris first beheld the light,
          Would that his mother, o’er her head, this brand
          Ordained by Heaven to fire his native land,
          Had cast, before he dwelt on Ida’s height.
          Unheeded from the bay’s prophetic shade
          Exclaimed Cassandra: “Let the child be slain;
          Kill him, or Priam’s empire is betrayed.”
        Frantic she raved and sued to every prince in vain.

    II. 2.

          Deaf was each prince, or Ilion ne’er had felt
          The servile yoke, nor hadst thou, hapless fair,
          Beneath these roofs, encompassed by despair,
          And subject to a rigid master, dwelt.
          O had he died, the fated toil of Greece,
          That stubborn war through ten revolving years,
          Had roused no heroes from the lap of peace,
        Nor caused the widow’s shrieks, the hoary father’s tears.

MENELAUS, MOLOSSUS, ANDROMACHE, CHORUS.

    MEN. Your son I hither bring, whom from this fane
    With secrecy, you to another house,
    Without my daughter’s knowledge, had removed.
    You boasted that this image of the goddess
    To you, and those who hid him, would afford
    A sure asylum: but your deep-laid craft,
    O woman, cannot baffle Menelaus.
    If you depart not hence, he in your stead
    Shall be the victim; therefore well revolve
    Th’ important question; had you rather die,
    Or, with his streaming gore, let him atone
    The foul offence ’gainst me and ’gainst my daughter
    By you committed?

    AND.              Thou, O vain opinion,
    Hast with renown puffed up full many men
    Who were of no account. I deem those blest
    On whom with truth such honour is bestowed:
    But them who by fallacious means obtain it
    I hold unworthy of possessing fame.
    When all their seeming wisdom but arises
    From Fortune’s gifts. Thou with the bravest chiefs
    Of Greece, from Priam erst didst wrest his Troy;
    E’en thou who art so mean as to inspire
    Thy daughter with resentment ’gainst a child,
    And strive with me a miserable captive:
    Unworthy of thy conquest over Troy
    Thee do I hold, and Troy yet more disgraced
    By such a victor. Some indeed there are
    To all appearance upright, who awhile
    Outwardly glitter, though they in their hearts
    Are on a level with the worthless bulk
    Of mortals, and superior but in wealth
    Whose power is great. This conference let us end,
    O Menelaus, be it now supposed
    I by thy daughter am already slain:
    ’Twill be impossible for her to ’scape
    From the pollution ruthless murder brings;
    Thou too by many tongues wilt be accused
    Of this vile deed, with her will they confound
    Thee the abettor. But if I preserve
    My life, are ye resolved to slay my son?
    How will the father tamely bear the death
    Of his loved offspring? he was not esteemed
    At Troy so void of courage. He is gone
    Whither his duty calls. Soon will the chief
    Act worthy of the race from which he springs,
    The hoary Peleus, and his dauntless sire
    Achilles, he from these abodes will cast
    Thy daughter forth, and when thou to another
    In marriage giv’st her, what hast thou to say
    On her behalf? “That from a worthless lord
    Her wisdom drove her?” This would be a falsehood
    Too gross. But who would wed her? till grown grey
    In widowhood, shall she beneath thy roofs
    Fix her loathed residence? O wretched man,
    The rising conflux of unnumbered woes
    Behold’st thou not? hadst thou not rather find
    Thy daughter wronged by concubines, than suffering
    Th’ indignities I speak of? we from trifles
    Such grievous mischiefs ought not to create;
    Nor if we women are a deadly bane,
    To the degenerate nature of our sex
    Should men conform. If I pernicious drugs
    Have to thy daughter ministered, and been,
    As she pretends, the cause of her abortion,
    Immediately will I without reluctance,
    And without grovelling at this altar’s base,
    To any rigid punishment submit
    Inflicted by thy son-in-law, from whom
    I surely merit as severe revenge
    For having made him childless. Such am I:
    But in thy temper I perceive one cause
    Of just alarm, since in that luckless strife
    About a woman, and a vile one too,
    Thou the famed Phrygian city didst destroy.

    CHOR. Too freely hast thou spoken, in a tone
    Which ill becomes thy sex, and that high soul
    The bounds of wisdom hath o’erleaped.

    MEN.                                  O woman,
    So small an object, as you rightly judge,
    Deserves not the attention of my realm,
    Nor that of Greece. But learn this obvious truth:
    To any man whate’er he greatly needs,
    Is of more worth by far than taking Troy.
    My daughter I assist, because I deem it
    A wrong of great importance should she lose
    Her bridal rights: for every woman looks
    On all beside as secondary ills:
    But if she from her husband’s arms be torn,
    Seems reft of life itself. That Phthia’s prince
    Direct my servants, and that his obey
    Me and my race, is fitting: for true friends
    Have no distinct possessions, but hold all
    In common. While I wait for the return
    Of her long absent lord, should I neglect
    My daughter’s interests, I were weak, not wise.
    But leave this shrine of Thetis: for the child
    Shall if you bleed escape th’ impending doom:
    Him, if you die not, will I slay, since fate
    Of you or him the forfeit life demands.

    AND. Ah me! a bitter and unwelcome choice
    Of life on terms like these hast thou proposed;
    Wretch that I am! for whether I decline
    Or make such option, I am wretched still.
    O thou, who by a trifling wrong provoked,
    Committ’st great crimes, attend: for what offence
    Wouldst thou bereave me of my life? what city
    Have I betrayed? what child of thine destroyed?
    What mansion fired? I to my master’s bed
    By force was dragged: yet me alone, not him
    The author of that crime, thou mean’st to slay.
    Thou, the first cause o’erlooking, on th’ effect
    Which it produces, vent’st thy rage. What woes
    Encompass wretched me! alas! my country!
    How dreadful are the wrongs which I endure!
    But wherefore was I doomed to bear a child,
    And to the burden under which I groan
    Add a new burden? what delight can life
    To me afford? or on what fortunes past
    Or present should I turn these eyes which saw
    The corse of Hector by the victor’s car
    Whirled round the walls, and wretched Troy a heap
    Of blazing ruins? I meantime a slave
    By my dishevelled hair was dragged aboard
    The Argive navy; when I reached the coast
    Of Phthia, and cohabited with those
    Who slew my Hector; (but why lavish plaints
    On past calamities, without deploring
    Or taking a due estimate of those
    Which now impend?) I had this only son
    My life’s last comfort left, and they who take
    Delight in deeds of cruelty, would slay him;
    Yet to preserve my miserable life
    He shall not perish; for auspicious hopes,
    Could he be saved, his future days attend:
    But if I died not for my son, reproach
    Would be my portion. Lo! I leave the altar
    And now am in thy hands, stab, slay me, bind,
    Strain hard the deadly noose. My son, thy mother,
    To rescue thee from an untimely grave,
    Descends the shades beneath; if thou escape
    The ruthless grasp of fate, remember me
    How miserably I suffered; and with kisses,
    At his return, when thou goest forth to meet
    Thy father, when a flood of tears thou shedd’st,
    And cling’st around him with those pliant arms,
    Inform him how I acted. All men hold
    Their children dear as life; but he who scorns them
    Because he ne’er experienced what it is
    To be a father, though with fewer griefs
    Attended, but enjoys imperfect bliss.

                      [_Rises, and advances from the altar._

    CHOR. I with compassion to this moving tale
    Have listened; for distress, to all mankind,
    Though strangers, must seem piteous: but on thee,
    O Menelaus, ’tis incumbent now
    To reconcile thy daughter, and this captive,
    That she may from her sorrows be released.

    MEN. Seize her, and bind her hands; for she shall hear
    No pleasing language: I proposed to slay
    Your son, that you might leave that hallowed altar
    Of Thetis, and thus craftily induced you
    To fall into my hands, and meet your death;
    Be well assured, such is the present state
    Of your affairs: as for that boy, on him
    My daughter shall pass judgment, or to kill,
    Or spare him: but now enter these abodes,
    That you may learn, slave as you are, to treat
    Those who are free no longer with disdain.

    AND. Thou hast o’erreached me by thy treacherous arts;
    Alas! I am betrayed.

    MEN.                Proclaim these tidings
    To all men; for I shall not contradict them.

    AND. By those who dwell beside Eurotas’ stream
    Are such base frauds called wisdom?

    MEN.                                Both at Troy
    And there, ’tis just the injured should retaliate.

    AND. Believ’st thou that the gods are gods no longer,
    Nor wield the bolt of vengeance?

    MEN.                            We must look
    To that: but you shall die.

    AND.                        And wilt thou seize
    This unfledged bird, to slay him?

    MEN.                              No, I will not,
    But give him to my daughter, who must act
    As she thinks fit.

    AND.              Then how, alas, my son!
    Can I sufficiently bewail thy fate?

    MEN. “Him,” ’twas but now with arrogance you said,
    “Auspicious hopes attend.”

    AND.                      Ye worst of foes
    To all mankind, inhabitants of Sparta!
    Expert in treacherous counsels, still devising
    New falsehoods, curst artificers of mischief,
    Your paths are crooked, yet though void of worth,
    Through Greece by circumspection ye uphold
    An undeserved pre-eminence. What crimes,
    What murders, what a thirst for abject gain
    Characterize your realm! with specious tongue
    Uttering a language foreign to your heart,
    Are ye not ever caught? Perdition seize you!
    Death is less grievous than thou deem’st to me
    Who date my utter ruin from that hour
    When Ilion’s wretched city was involved
    In the same fate with my illustrious lord,
    Whose spear oft drove thee trembling from the field
    Into thy ships: but now against his wife
    A formidable warrior art thou come
    To murder me: strike, for this coward tongue
    Shall never leave thine and thy daughter’s shame
    Unpublished. If in Sparta thou art great,
    So was I erst in Ilion; but exult not
    In my disasters, for on thee ere long
    The same reverse of fortune may attend.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

        Two rival consorts ne’er can I approve,
        Or sons, the source of strife, their birth who owe
        To different mothers; hence connubial love
        Is banished, and the mansion teems with woe.
        One blooming nymph let cautious husbands wed,
        And share with her alone an unpolluted bed.

    I. 2.

        No prudent city, no well-governed state,
        More than a single potentate will own;
        Their subjects droop beneath the grievous weight
        When two bear rule, and discord shakes the throne;
        And if two bards awake their sounding lyres
        E’en the harmonious Muse a cruel strife inspires,

    II. 1.

        To aid the bark, when prosperous gales arise,
        Two jarring pilots shall misguide the helm:
        Weak is a multitude when all are wise,
        One simpler monarch could have saved the realm.
        Let a sole chief the house or empire sway,
        And all who hope for bliss their lord’s behests obey.

    II. 2.

        This truth hath Menelaus’ daughter shown,
        Furious she comes the victim to destroy;
        And, that their blood may nuptial wrongs atone,
        The Phrygian captive, and that hapless boy,
        With impious rage unjust would cause to bleed;
        May pity, awful queen, thy lifted arm impede!

    But I before these doors behold the pair
    On whom the fatal sentence now is passed.
    Thou wretched dame, and wretched child who diest
    Because thy mother to a foreign bed
    By force was dragged, in her imputed guilt
    Thou wert not an accomplice, thou thy lords
    Hast not offended.

    AND.              To the realms beneath,
    Lo, I am hurried, with these bloody hands
    Fast bound in galling chains.

    MOL.                          I too, O mother,
    Under thy wing, to those loathed shades descend
    A victim. O ye lords of Phthia’s land,
    And thou, my father, succour those thou lov’st.

    AND. Cling to thy mother’s bosom, O my child,
    Together let us die.

    MOL.                Ah me! how grievous
    My sufferings are! too clearly I perceive
    That I, and thou my mother, both are wretched.

    MEN. Go both together to th’ infernal realm:
    For ye from hostile turrets hither came.
    Although the cause why you and he must bleed
    Is not the same, my sentence takes away
    Your life, and my Hermione’s your son’s.
    The highest folly were it to permit
    A foe to live and vex us, whom with ease
    We might despatch, and from our house remove
    Such danger.

    AND.        O my husband, would to Heaven
    I had thy arm to aid me; and thy spear,
    Thou son of Priam.

    MOL.              Wretched me! what charm
    Can I devise t’ avert impending fate?

    AND. My son, implore the mercy of our lord
    Clasping his knees.

    MOL.                Dear monarch, spare my life.

    AND. Tears from these eyes burst forth like trickling drops
    By the sun’s heat forced from a solid rock,
    Wretch that I am!

    MOL.              What remedy, alas!
    For these dire evils can my soul devise?

    MEN. Why dost thou idly grovel at my feet
    With fruitless supplications, while I stand
    Firm as a rock, or as th’ unpitying wave?
    Such conduct serves my interests: no affection
    To thee I bear, because my morn of life
    Was wasted in the conflict, ere I took
    Troy and thy mother, whose society
    Thou in the realms of Pluto shalt enjoy.

PELEUS, MENELAUS, ANDROMACHE, MOLOSSUS, CHORUS.

    CHOR. Peleus, I see, draws near, his aged feet
    With eager haste advancing.

    PEL.                        You, and him
    Who stands presiding o’er a murderous deed,
    What means this uproar that disturbs the house,
    I question, and what practices are these
    Ye carry on unauthorized by law?
    O Menelaus, stay thy furious hand,
    And let not execution thus outstrip
    All righteous judgment. O my friends, lead on;
    For such a dread emergency appears
    T’ admit of no delay. Could I regain
    That youthful vigour which I erst enjoyed
    As prosperous breezes aid the floating sails,
    This captive would I favour. Say, what right
    Have they to bind your hands, and drag along
    You and your son? for like the bleating mother,
    Led forth to slaughter with her lamb, you perish,
    While I and your unwitting lord are absent.

    AND. They, as thou seest, O venerable man,
    Me and my son thus bear to instant death.
    What shall I say to thee, whom I with speed
    Not by one single messenger but thousands
    Have sent for? sure thou, of the fatal strife
    In these divided mansions, with his daughter,
    To which I owe my ruin, must have heard:
    And from the violated shrine of Thetis,
    Who bore to thee a noble son, the goddess
    Whom thou rever’st e’en now with brutal force
    Me have they torn, nor judged my cause, nor wait
    For absent Neoptolemus, but, knowing
    That I and that this child who hath committed
    No fault, are left alone and unprotected,
    Would slay us both. But, O thou aged man,
    Thus prostrate on my knees, to thee I sue,
    And, though this hand must not presume to touch
    Thy honoured beard, conjure thee by the gods,
    Rescue us, or to thy eternal shame
    Both he and I must miserably bleed.

    PEL. My orders are that you those galling chains
    Unbind and loose her hands, else will I make
    The disobedient weep.

    MEN.                  But I, your equal,
    Who have much more authority o’er her,
    Forbid them.

    PEL.        Com’st thou hither to direct
    My household? is it not enough for thee
    To rule thy Spartans?

    MEN.                  Her I took at Troy.

    PEL. She, to reward his valour, was bestowed
    Upon my grandson.

    MEN.              Doth not all he owns,
    To me, and what is mine, to him belong?

    PEL. For honest purposes, but not for crimes
    And murderous violence.

    MEN.                    You ne’er shall take her
    Out of my hands.

    PEL.            Thy head I with this sceptre
    Will smite.

    MEN.        Draw near; if you presume to touch me,
    Soon shall you rue such outrage.

    PEL.                            O thou villain,
    Sprung from a race of impious sires, what right
    To be accounted an illustrious man,
    And numbered with the truly brave, hast thou,
    Who by a Phrygian wanderer wert deprived
    Of thy fair consort, after thou hadst left
    Thy house unbarred and destitute of guards,
    As if thou in thy mansions hadst possessed
    A virtuous dame, though she of all her sex
    Was the most dissolute? nor if she would
    Can any Spartan nymph be chaste? for wandering
    From their own homes, distinguished by bare legs,
    And zoneless vest, they with young men contend
    In swiftness and in wrestling; I such customs
    Hold in abhorrence. Is there any room
    For wonder if the women prove unchaste
    Whom thus you educate? thy Helen ought
    To have proposed these questions, ere she left
    Her native realm, regardless of thy love,
    And by that youthful paramour seduced,
    Wantonly fled into a foreign land.
    Yet for her sake didst thou that numerous host
    Of Greeks collect, and lead them to assail
    The Phrygian ramparts. Thou that beauteous dame
    Shouldst rather have despised, nor in her cause
    Wielded the javelin, when thou found’st her worthless,
    But suffered her in Ilion to remain,
    And sent rich gifts to Paris on these terms,
    That to thy house she never should return.
    But thou, instead of suffering these just motives
    To make their due impression on thy soul,
    Full many valiant warriors hast destroyed,
    Made th’ aged matron childless, and deprived
    Of his illustrious sons the hoary sire.
    Numbered with those who owe to thee thy ruin
    Am wretched I: for like some evil genius
    In thee do these indignant eyes behold
    The murderer of Achilles: thou alone,
    Save by the missile shaft, unwounded cam’st
    From Ilion’s hostile shores; in burnished chests
    Didst thou bear thither the same glittering arms
    Which thou bear’st back again. Before he wedded,
    I warned my grandson to form no connection
    With thee, nor into these abodes admit
    The brood of that adult’ress; for the daughters
    Their mother emulate in deeds of shame.
    Look well to this, ye suitors, and select
    The damsel with maternal worth endued.
    Then with what scorn didst thou thy brother treat,
    Commanding him ’gainst reason to transgress,
    And sacrifice his daughter. Thou such fears,
    Lest thou that execrable wife shouldst lose,
    Didst entertain. When thou hadst taken Troy,
    This too I urge against thee, though thou hadst
    Thy consort in thy power, thou didst not slay her,
    But when her throbbing bosom thou beheld’st
    Didst cast away thy sword, receive her kisses,
    And soothe the fears of her who had betrayed thee.
    O worthless miscreant, whom the Cyprian Queen
    Hath thus debased! thou after this intrud’st
    Into my grandson’s palace, in his absence
    Committ’st these outrages, and basely slay’st
    A miserable woman, and her child,
    Thee and thy daughter who shall cause to weep
    Though trebly illegitimate his birth.
    Oft the parched heath, when duly tilled, exceeds
    The richest soil, and greater instances
    Of virtue are in many a bastard found
    Than in the lawfully begotten race.
    But take thy daughter hence. Far better is it
    To form affinity and strictest friendship
    With a poor man of worth, than him who joins
    Iniquity with wealth: but as for thee,
    Thou art a thing of nought.

    CHOR.                      Among mankind,
    Oft from a small beginning doth the tongue
    Great strife occasion: but the wise beware
    Of entering on a contest with their friend.

    MEN. Why do we speak in such exalted terms
    Of aged men, as if they were endued
    With wisdom, though in former days supposed
    By the whole Grecian race to judge aright?
    When you, O Peleus, who derive your birth
    From an illustrious sire, and with my house
    So nearly are connected, hold a language
    Disgraceful to yourself, and slander me,
    For a barbarian dame, whom from this land
    You ought to banish far beyond the Nile,
    Beyond the Phasis, and applaud my vengeance;
    Because she comes from Asiatic shores,
    Where many valiant Grecian chiefs lie slain.
    And hath in part been guilty of the blood
    Of your famed son; for Paris, by whose shaft,
    Transpierced, Achilles perished, was the brother,
    And she the wife of Hector: yet you enter
    The same abode with her, the genial board
    With her partake, allow her to bring forth
    Under your roofs an execrable brood.
    These mischiefs both to you and me, old man,
    Foreseeing, have I snatched her from your hands
    With a design to kill her. But, O say,
    (For there is nought of meanness in our holding
    This conference), if my daughter bear no child,
    And she have sons, will you appoint them lords
    Of this your Phthian land? shall they who spring
    From a barbarian race, o’er Greeks bear rule?
    Am I, because I hate injustice, void
    Of understanding, and are you discreet?
    Reflect on this; had you bestowed your daughter
    On any citizen, were she thus treated,
    Would you sit down and bear her wrongs in silence?
    I deem you would not. Why then with such harshness
    Speak you in favour of a foreign dame
    Against your nearest friends? as great a right
    To vengeance as her husband, hath the wife
    Whom her lord injures: for while he whose doors
    An unchaste consort enters, in his hands
    Hath power to right himself, a woman’s strength
    Lies only in her parents and her friends.
    My daughter, therefore, am I bound to aid:
    You show the marks of age: for while you talk
    Of that famed war I waged, you more befriend me
    Than if you had been silent. Deep in woe
    Was Helen plunged, not by her own consent
    But by the gods: and this event hath proved
    To Greece most advantageous, for its sons
    Who knew not how till then to wield the spear,
    Grew valiant. From experience, best of tutors,
    Men gather all the knowledge they possess.
    But when I saw my consort, in forbearing
    To take away her life, I acted wisely:
    And would that you had done like me, nor slain
    Your brother Phocus; this to you I speak
    Through mere benevolence, and not in wrath:
    But if resentment o’er your soul usurp
    An empire, such intemperance of the tongue
    Will be in you more shameful, while my wishes
    I by a prudent forethought shall attain.

    CHOR. Now both desist (for this were better far)
    From such unprofitable strife of words,
    O ye will both offend.

    PEL.                  Ah me! through Greece
    What mischievous opinions have prevailed!
    When with the spoils of vanquished foes, the host
    A trophy rear, they think not how ’twas gained
    By those brave soldiers who endure the toil
    Of battle, while their general bears away
    All the renown: though he was only one
    Who stood ’midst thousands brandishing his spear,
    Nor any single combatant surpassed,
    He gains a larger portion of applause.
    The venerable rulers of a city,
    Placed in exalted stations, yet devoid
    Of any real merit, overlook
    The populace, though many in the crowd
    Of their inferiors are more wise than they,
    If haply courage and an honest zeal
    Unite to place them in the public view.
    Thou and thy brother thus are swollen with pride,
    From having led those troops to conquer Troy,
    And triumph in the sufferings of your friends.
    But henceforth will I teach thee not to look
    On Paris, Ida’s shepherd, as a foe,
    More terrible than Peleus. If with speed
    Thou quit not these abodes, and take away
    Thy childless daughter, my indignant grandson,
    By her dishevelled hair around the palace
    Will drag this barren dame, who stung with envy,
    Cannot endure the fruitful mother’s joys.
    But, if she prove so luckless as to bare
    No issue, ought she therefore to deprive us
    Of our posterity? Begone, ye slaves,
    That I may see who dares obstruct my loosing
    Her hands. Rise up: though trembling with old age,
    Your chains can I unbind. O worthless man,
    Hast thou thus galled her hands? didst thou suppose
    Thou held’st a bull or lion in the snare?
    Or didst thou shudder lest she should snatch up
    A sword, and wreak just vengeance on thy head?
    Come hither to these sheltering arms, my child,
    Unbind thy mother’s chains; in Phthia, thee
    I’ll educate, to them a bitter foe.
    Should Sparta’s sons by the protended spear
    Obtain no fame, nor in th’ embattled field
    Their prowess signalize, be well assured
    Ye have no other merit.

    CHOR.                  Old men talk
    With freedom, and their vehemence of soul
    Is hard to be restrained.

    MEN.                      Extremely prone
    Are you to slander; much against my will
    I came to Phthia, and am here resolved
    That I will neither do nor suffer aught
    Disgraceful: but to my own home with speed
    Am I returning, and have little time
    In vain debates to lavish: for a city
    Not far from Sparta’s gates and erst a friend
    Is waging war against us: I would lead
    My hardy squadrons forth t’ assail the foe,
    And utterly subdue them. To my wish
    Soon as this great affair I shall have settled,
    Hither will I return, and face to face,
    When I my reasons to my son-in-law
    Have in the clearest terms proposed, will hear
    What he can urge; and if he punish her,
    And for the future courteously to me
    Demean himself, from me he in return
    Shall meet with courtesy; but if he rage,
    He of my rage the dire effects shall feel:
    For still such treatment as his deeds deserve
    Shall he experience. But I am not hurt
    By these injurious words of yours; for like
    Some disembodied ghost, you have a voice,
    Although you are not able to do aught
    But merely speak.

                                           [_Exit_ MENELAUS.

    PEL.              Lead on, my boy; here take
    Thy station under these protecting arms;
    And thou too, O thou miserable dame,
    Driven hither by the furious storm; at length
    Into a quiet haven are ye come.

    AND. On thee and thy descendants may the gods
    Shower every blessing, venerable man,
    For having saved this child, and wretched me;
    Yet O beware, lest in some lonely spot
    They suddenly assail us, and by force
    Drag me away, perceiving thou art old,
    That I am a weak woman, and my son
    Is but an infant: all precautions use,
    Else we, who have escaped them, may again
    Be caught.

    PEL.      Forbear to utter, in such language
    As this, the dictates of a woman’s fear.
    Advance, who dares to touch you? he shall weep.
    For with the blessing of th’ immortal gods,
    And by unnumbered troops of valiant horse,
    And infantry supported, I bear rule
    Over the Phthian land. I am robust,
    Nor, as you deem, impaired by palsied age.
    Were I, opposed in battle, but to look
    On such a man as this, old as I am,
    An easy conquest soon should I obtain.
    Superior is the veteran, if with courage
    Inspired, to many youths: for what avails
    A vigorous body with a coward’s heart?

               [_Exeunt_ PELEUS, ANDROMACHE, _and_ MOLOSSUS.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I.

            My wish were this; or never to be born,
          Or to descend from generous sires, and share
          The blessings which attend a wealthy heir.
            If heaviest woes assail, ne’er left forlorn
            Without a friend are they of nobler race,
            Hereditary trophies deck their head:
            The records of the brave with joy we trace,
            No distant age their memory can efface,
        For virtue’s torch unquenched pours radiance o’er the dead.

    II.

            Better is conquest, when we gain our right
          By no reproachful means, no deeds of shame,
          Than if to envy we expose our fame,
            And trample on the laws with impious might.
            Such laurels which at first too sweetly bloom,
            Ere long are withered by the frost of time,
            And scorn pursues their wearers to the tomb.
            I in my household or the state presume
        To seek that power alone which rules without a crime.

    III.

        O veteran, sprung from Æacus, thy spear
              Chilled the Lapithæ with fear,
            And from their hills the Centaurs drove.
              When glory called, and prosperous gales
            Swelled the Argo’s daring sails,
            Intrepid didst thou pass that strait
        Where ruin oft the crashing bark attends,
              And ocean’s foam descends
        From the Symplegades’ obstructing height.
        Next didst thou land on perjured Ilion’s shore,
        With Hercules illustrious son of Jove,
            Then first its bulwarks streamed with gore:
            Till crowned with fame a partner of his toil,
        Europe again thou sought’st and Phthia’s frozen soil.

THE NURSE OF HERMIONE, CHORUS.

    NUR. How doth a rapid series of events
    The most disastrous, O my dearest friends,
    This day invade us! for within these doors
    Hermione my mistress, by her sire
    Forsaken, and grown conscious of the guilt
    She hath incurred, by that attempt to murder
    Andromache and her unhappy son,
    Resolves to die, because she dreads, lest fired
    With indignation at her guilt, her lord
    Should cast her forth with scorn, or take away
    Her life, because she purposed to have slain
    The innocent. The servants who attend
    Can hardly by their vigilance prevent her
    From fixing round her neck the deadly noose,
    Or snatch the dagger from her hand, so great
    Is her affliction, and she now confesses
    That she has done amiss. My strength’s exhausted
    In striving to withhold my royal mistress
    From perishing by an ignoble death.
    But enter ye these mansions, and attempt
    To save her life, for strangers can persuade
    Far better than old friends.

    CHOR.                        We hear the voice
    Of her attendants from within confirm
    Th’ intelligence thou hither cam’st to bring:
    That hapless woman seems just on the point
    Of showing with what rage she by her guilt
    Is hurried on: for lo, she rushes forth
    From yon abodes, already hath she ’scaped
    Her servants’ hands, and is resolved to die.

HERMIONE, NURSE, CHORUS.

    HER. Ah me! these ringlets how will I tear off,
    How rend my cheeks!

    NUR.                What mean’st thou, O my daughter?
    Wilt thou thus injure that fair frame?

    HER.                                Away,
    O thou slight veil, I pluck thee from my head,
    And toss thy scattered fragments in the air.

    NUR. Cover thy bosom with the decent robe.

    HER. Why with a robe my bosom should I hide?
    The crimes I have committed ’gainst my lord
    Are clear, well known, and cannot be concealed.

    NUR. Griev’st thou because thou hast formed schemes to slay
    Thy rival?

    HER.      I with many groans bewail
    Those hostile darings, execrable wretch,
    Wretch that I am, an object of just hate
    To all mankind.

    NUR.            Thy husband such offence
    Will pardon.

    HER.        From my hand why didst thou snatch
    The sword? Restore, restore it, O my friends,
    That I this bosom may transpierce. Why force me
    To quit yon pendant noose?

    NUR.                      In thy distraction
    Shall I forsake and leave thee thus to die?

    HER. Where shall I find (inform me, O ye Fates)
    The blazing pyre, ascend the craggy rock,
    Plunge in the billows, or amidst the woods
    On a steep mountain waste the life I loathe,
    That after death the gods beneath may take me
    To their protection?

    CHOR.                Why wouldst thou make efforts
    So violent? some mischiefs sent by Heaven
    Sooner or later visit all mankind.

    HER. Me like a stranded bark, thou, O my sire,
    Hast left forsaken and without an oar.
    To thee I owe my ruin. I no longer
    In these my bridal mansions can reside.
    To the propitious statues of what God
    With suppliant haste shall I repair, or fall
    At a slave’s knees, myself an abject slave?
    I from the land of Phthia, like a bird
    Upborne on azure wings, would speed my flight,
    Or imitate that ship whose dashing oars
    ’Twixt the Cyanean straits first urged their way.

    NUR. As little, O my daughter, can I praise
    That vehemence which caused thee to transgress
    Against the Trojan dame, as these thy fears
    Which are immoderate. For such slight offence
    Thy lord, misled by the pernicious tongue
    Of a barbarian woman, from his couch
    Will not expel thee: for thou art not his
    By right of conquest, borne from vanquished Troy;
    But thee, the daughter of a mighty king,
    He with abundant dower, and from a city
    Most flourishing, received: nor will thy sire,
    His child forsaking, as thou dread’st, permit thee
    To be cast forth: but enter these abodes,
    Nor show thyself without, lest some affront
    Thou shouldst receive if haply thou art seen
    Before these doors.

                                              [_Exit_ NURSE.

    CHOR.              Behold a man, whose dress
    Is of such different fashion that it speaks
    The foreigner, comes swiftly from the gate.

ORESTES, HERMIONE, CHORUS.

    ORE. Is this th’ abode of great Achilles’ son,
    The regal mansion, O ye foreign dames?

    CHOR. It is as thou hast said. But who art thou
    That ask’st this question?

    ORE.                      Agamemnon’s son,
    And Clytemnestra’s; but my name’s Orestes:
    I to Dodona, th’ oracle of Jove,
    Am on my road; but since I now have reached
    The land of Phthia, first would I inquire
    How fares Hermione, the Spartan dame,
    My kinswoman; doth she yet live and prosper?
    For though from me far distant be the land
    In which she now resides, she still is dear.

    HER. O son of Agamemnon, who thus make
    Your seasonable appearance, like the haven
    To mariners amidst a furious storm,
    Take pity, I implore you by those knees,
    On me a wretch whose inauspicious fortunes
    You witness. Hence around your knees I fling
    These arms, which ought to prove of equal force
    With hallowed branches by the suppliant borne.

    ORE. What’s this? am I deceived? or do my eyes
    Indeed behold the queen of these abodes,
    And Menelaus’ daughter?

    HER.                    Th’ only child
    Whom to the Spartan monarch Helen bore.
    Mistake me not.

    ORE.            O Phœbus, healing power,
    Protect us! But what dire mischance hath happened?
    Or from the gods, or human foes, proceed
    The evils thou endur’st?

    HER.                    Some from myself,
    But others from the husband whom I wedded
    The rest from one of the immortal gods.
    I utterly am ruined.

    ORE.                What afflictions
    Can any woman who’s yet childless feel
    But those which from her nuptial union spring?

    HER. Hence these distempers of the soul arise,
    And well do you anticipate my words.

    ORE. Enamoured with another, is thy lord
    False to thy bed?

    HER.              He loves a captive dame,
    The wife of Hector.

    ORE.                This of which thou speak’st
    Is a great evil, when one man possesses
    Two wives.

    HER.        ’Twas thus, till I avenged the wrong.

    ORE. Didst thou with arts familiar to thy sex
    Plot ’gainst thy rival’s life?

    HER.                          I would have killed
    Her and her spurious son.

    ORE.                      Hast thou despatched them?
    Or were they screened from their impending fate?

    HER. Old Peleus to these worthless objects showed
    Too great a reverence.

    ORE.                  Was there any friend
    Ready to aid thee in the purposed slaughter?

    HER. My sire, who for this cause from Sparta came.

    ORE. Yet by that aged man was he subdued?

    HER. Abashed he fled, and left me here alone.

    ORE. I understand thee well: thy husband’s wrath
    Thou fear’st for what thou’st done.

    HER.                                The fact you know:
    Hence justly will he take away my life.
    What can be said? yet by immortal Jove,
    Our grandsire, I conjure you, send me far
    From these domains, or to my father’s house.
    Had but these walls a voice, they would proclaim
    The sentence of my exile, for the land
    Of Phthia hates me. If my lord return
    From Phœbus’ oracle, for the misdeeds
    I have committed, he will strike me dead,
    Or force me to become that harlot’s slave
    Whom erst I ruled.

    ORE.              By some will it be asked
    Whence then into such errors didst thou fall?

    HER. My ruin I derive from the admission
    Of these vile women, who inflamed my pride
    By uttering these rash words: “Wilt thou endure
    Beneath thy roof that odious slave who shares
    Thy bridal couch? by Juno, awful queen,
    I would not suffer such a wretch to breathe
    In my polluted chamber.” When I heard
    The language uttered by these crafty sirens,
    Artificers of mischief, who, to suit
    Their purpose, in persuasive strains displayed
    The power of eloquence, I was puffed up
    With folly: for what need had I to hold
    My lord in reverence while possessed of all
    That I could wish? abundant wealth was mine,
    O’er these abodes I reigned, and any children
    I to my husband might hereafter bare
    Would be legitimate; but hers, by mine
    In strict subjection held, a spurious race.
    But never, never (I this truth repeat)
    Should wedded men, who have the gift of reason,
    Let women have a free access, and visit
    Their consort. For they teach her evil lessons:
    Urged by the hopes of lucre, one corrupts
    Her chastity; a second hath already
    Transgressed herself, and wishes that her friend
    May be as vicious: many by their lust
    Are led astray: hence to their husband’s house
    A train of mischief rises. Guard the doors
    Of your abodes with locks and massive bars;
    Since from the intrusion of these female guests,
    No good, but mischiefs numberless ensue.

    CHOR. Thou to thy tongue hast given too free a scope
    In thus aspersing the whole female race:
    Thy present woes indeed our pardon claim;
    Yet every woman is in duty bound
    To gloss o’er the misconduct of her sex.

    ORE. Wisdom pertained to him who taught mankind
    To hear the reasons by both parties urged
    In a debate. Aware of the confusion
    In these abodes, and of the strife ’twixt thee
    And Hector’s wife, I stayed not to observe
    Whether thou in this house wouldst still remain,
    Or through a fear of yonder captive dame
    Abandon it: I therefore hither came,
    Nor waited for intelligence from thee.
    And if a satisfactory account
    Of thy proceedings thou to me canst give,
    I will convey thee hence. For thou, who erst
    Wert mine, with this thy present husband liv’st,
    Through the perfidious conduct of thy sire,
    Who ere he entered the domains of Troy
    Affianced thee to me, and then to him
    Who now possesses thee, again engaged,
    If he the Phrygian city should subdue.
    But I forgive thy father for this wrong,
    When hither great Achilles’ son returned,
    And to the bridegroom sued that he would loose
    Thy plighted hand; of all my various fortunes
    Informing him, and of my present woes;
    How feasible it were for me to wed
    Among my friends, but that for such an exile
    As I am, driven from my paternal throne,
    ’Twould not be easy to obtain a consort
    In any foreign land: on this he grew
    More arrogant, and bitterly reproached me
    Both with my mother’s murder, and those Furies
    Whose blood-stained visages inspire dismay.
    By the misfortunes of my house bowed down
    To earth, I grieved indeed, but grieving bore
    The weight of these calamities, and reft
    Of thee my bride, reluctantly departed.
    But since thy fortunes now have undergone
    A change so unexpected, and involved
    In woe, thou stand’st aghast; from these abodes
    Thee will I take and to thy sire convey.
    For wondrous is the force of kindred ties;
    And in misfortunes nought exceeds the friend
    Who from the self-same house derives his birth.

    HER. My father will take care how to dispose
    Of me in marriage, nor is it my province
    Such question to decide. But, O convey me
    From these loathed mansions with the utmost speed,
    Lest when my husband at his first return
    Enters the doors, he intercept my flight;
    Or, hearing that I leave his grandson’s house,
    Peleus pursue me with his rapid steeds.

    ORE. Be of good cheer against that aged man,
    And from thy furious lord, Achilles’ son,
    Who treated me with scorn, fear nought; this hand
    Hath with such cautious artifice prepared
    For him th’ inevitable snares of death,
    Of which no previous mention will I make:
    But when it is accomplished, this exploit
    Shall on the rock of Delphi be proclaimed.
    I who my mother slew, if th’ armed friends
    Whom I have stationed in the Pythian realm
    Observe their oaths, will teach him that he ought
    To have abstained from wedding any dame
    Betrothed to me. He in an evil hour
    Shall claim atonement for his father’s death
    Of Phœbus mighty king; nor shall repentance
    For these audacious blasphemies avail
    To save the miscreant on whose impious head
    Apollo wreaks just vengeance; by his wrath
    O’ertaken, and entangled in my snares,
    He wretchedly shall perish. For the gods
    Subvert the prosperous fortunes of their foes
    Nor suffer pride to rear her towering crest.

                           [_Exeunt_ ORESTES _and_ HERMIONE.

CHORUS.

    ODE.

    I. 1.

            Phœbus, thou god who with a mound
        Of stately towers didst Ilion’s rock surround;
        And thou, O Neptune, ruler of the main,
            Borne swiftly by thy azure steeds
        In a light car, who cleav’st the watery plain;
        After exerting with unwearied toil
            Such skill as human works exceeds,
        ’Gainst wretched Troy when Mars his javelin bore,
            Why, faithless to that chosen soil,
            Left ye your city drenched in gore?

    I. 2.

            The steeds ye yoked on Simois’ banks
        Whirled many a chariot through the broken ranks;
        No hero gathered in that stubborn fray
            One laurel to adorn his head:
        Phrygia’s illustrious rulers swept away,
        Took their last voyage to a distant shore,
            And mingled with the vulgar dead,
        While the polluted altars ceased to gleam
            Upwafting to the skies no more
            Their frankincense in odorous steam.

    II. 1.

            Slain by his wife Atrides fell;
        His furious son sent to the shades of Hell
        The murderess, and returned th’ unnatural deed,
            That fatal stroke the god approved,
        His oracles ordained that she should bleed,
        When young Orestes at the inmost shrine
            Was by a heavenly impulse moved,
        His hands in gore maternal to imbrue.
            O Phœbus, O thou power divine,
            How shall I think th’ assertion true?

    II. 2.

            In Greece doth many a dame complain
        Chaunting rude dirges for her children slain;
        Others their native land reluctant leave,
            And to a foreign lord are brought.
        Nor yet hast thou alone just cause to grieve,
        Nor to thy friends hath Heaven’s peculiar hate
            These signal miseries wrought:
        Victorious Greece still feels as deep a wound,
            From whence the thunderbolt of fate
            Through Phrygia scattered deaths around.

PELEUS, CHORUS.

    PEL. Answer my questions, O ye Phthian dames,
    For doubtful is the rumour I have heard,
    That Menelaus’ daughter, when she left
    This house departed from the realm. I come
    Anxious to learn if this account be true.
    For ’tis their duty who remain at home
    To guard the fortunes of their absent friends.

    CHOR. What thou hast heard, O Peleus, is the truth,
    And ill would it become me to conceal
    The woes in which I deeply am involved:
    Our royal mistress from these walls is fled.

    PEL. What feared she? say.

    CHOR.                      The anger of her lord,
    Lest he from these abodes should cast her forth.

    PEL. Because she plotted to have slain the boy?

    CHOR. E’en so it was. Yon captive too she dreaded.

    PEL. But from these mansions did she go, attended,
    Or by her father or by whom?

    CHOR.                        The son
    Of Agamemnon from this land conveyed her.

    PEL. What are his views? to take her for his bride?

    CHOR. Thy grandson too he meditates to slay.

    PEL. Stationed in secret ambush, or resolved
    To meet the dauntless warrior face to face?

    CHOR. Beneath Apollo’s unpolluted fane
    With Delphi’s citizens.

    PEL.                    Atrocious crime!
    Ah me! will no one with his utmost speed
    Go to the altar of the Pythian god,
    And to our friends disclose what passes here,
    Ere by his foes Achilles’ son is slain?

MESSENGER, PELEUS, CHORUS.

    MES. What evil tidings do I bring to you,
    O aged man, and all my master’s friends!

    PEL. By a sad presage which affects my soul
    I of th’ impending evil am forewarned.

    MES. Know then, O Peleus, that your wretched grandson
    Is now no more, with such unnumbered wounds
    He by the Delphic citizens transpierced,
    And by that stranger from Mycene died.

    CHOR. Alas! alas! but what resource is left
    For thee, thou hoary veteran? do not fall;
    Raise thyself up.

    PEL.              To very nothing now
    Am I reduced, I utterly am ruined:
    The power of speech deserts me, and these limbs
    Forget their office.

    MES.                Hear me, and from earth
    Arise, if, with th’ assistance of your friends,
    You for this murder wish to be revenged.

    PEL. How hast thou compassed wretched me, who stand
    On the last verge of spiritless old age,
    O cruel fate! say how the only son
    Of my deceased, my only son, was slain.
    These tidings though unwelcome would I hear.

    MES. After we reached Apollo’s sacred realm,
    While thrice the chariot of the sun performed
    Its bright career, we satiated our eyes
    With viewing all around. The circumstance
    Which raised suspicion first, was this: the people
    Who dwell within the temple of the god
    Held frequent meetings, and in crowds assembled.
    Meanwhile the son of Agamemnon went
    Through the whole city, and in every ear
    Whispered malignant words like these: “Behold
    Him who is visiting the hallowed shrine
    Of Phœbus piled with gold, the treasures given
    By all mankind; the miscreant comes again
    On the same purpose which first drew him hither,
    To overthrow the temple of the god.”
    Through the whole city hence an evil rumour
    Went forth, and all the magistrates, to whom
    The holy treasures were consigned, assembled,
    In secret councils held, and placed a guard
    Behind the massive columns in the fane.
    We, unapprized of this, meantime had caught
    Some sheep, that fed amid Parnassus’ grove,
    And with our Delphic friends and Pythian seers
    Approached the altar: some one said: “Young man,
    What vows on thy behalf shall we address
    To Phœbus? for what purpose art thou come?”
    He answered: “To the god I wish to make
    A due atonement for my past offence,
    Because I erst from him with impious tongue
    Claimed satisfaction for my father’s blood.”
    Hence did Orestes’ calumnies appear
    To have great weight, suggesting that my lord
    Spoke an untruth, and that he hither came
    With vile designs. Beneath the holy roof,
    That to Apollo he might offer up
    His prayers in that oracular abode,
    He now advanced, and as they blazed, observed
    The victims: here a troop with falchions armed
    Screened by the branching laurels stood; the son
    Of Clytemnestra was the sole contriver
    Of all these stratagems. Our lord stood forth,
    And, in the sight of this insidious band,
    Adored the god: while they with their keen swords,
    Ere he discerned them, pierced Achilles’ son
    Unsheathed in mail. He instantly retreated;
    For he as yet had by no deadly wound
    Been smitten; but snatched up in his retreat
    Those glittering arms which near the portals hung,
    And stood a champion terrible to view,
    Close to the blazing altar: with loud voice
    He questioned the inhabitants of Delphi:
    “Me who a pious votary hither come,
    Why, or for what offences, would ye slay!”
    Although the number of his foes was great,
    None of them answered, but all hands hurled stones:
    On every side assaulted by a storm
    Thick as the falling snows, he warded off,
    Extending the broad margin of his shield,
    Each missile weapon: but of no avail
    Was this resistance: for the spear, the shaft,
    The dart, were thrown at once, and at his feet
    Mixed instruments of sacrifice lay scattered.
    Th’ agility with which your grandson shunned
    The blows they aimed, was wondrous to behold:
    They in a circle gathering round, closed in,
    Nor gave him space to breathe, till from the altar
    Descending with a leap like that which bore
    The hapless Grecian chief to Phrygia’s coast,
    He rushed among them: like a flock of doves
    Who see the hawk appear, they turned and fled:
    In heaps on heaps promiscuous, many fell,
    Some in the narrow passage wounded lay,
    While others o’er them trampled, and their groans
    Unholy echoed through the hallowed dome.
    But, tranquil as the waters in a calm,
    In golden arms my lord resplendent stood,
    Till from the inmost sanctuary burst forth
    A deep-toned voice of horror, which impelled
    The recreant warriors to renew the fight:
    Achilles’ son then smitten through the flank
    With a keen sword, by one of Delphi fell,
    Who slew him, yet ignobly, with the aid
    Of multitudes. But after he to earth
    Was fallen, what sword transpierced him not, what hand
    Threw not a stone to smite him? his whole frame,
    So graceful erst, was with unnumbered wounds
    Disfigured: till at length his mangled corse,
    Which stained the altar’s basis, from the fane
    Drenched with the blood of victims they cast forth.
    But gathering up with speed, his loved remains
    To you we bear, O venerable man,
    That o’er them you may shed the plenteous tear,
    And grace them with sepulchral rites. Thus Phœbus,
    Who prophesies to others, mighty king,
    And deals out justice to th’ admiring world,
    Hath on Achilles’ son revenged himself,
    And, like some worthless human foe, revived
    An ancient grudge: how then can he be wise?

                                          [_Exit_ MESSENGER.

    CHOR. But lo! our royal master, from the land
    Of Delphi borne, approaches these abodes!
    Wretched was he, by such untimely doom
    O’ertaken: nor art thou, O aged man,
    Less wretched than the slaughtered youth: for thou
    Into thy doors receiv’st Achilles’ son,
    But not as thou couldst wish; thou too art fallen
    Into affliction’s snare.

    PEL.                    What piteous object,
    Ah me! do I behold, and with these hands
    Receive into my house! we are undone,
    We are undone, O thou Thessalian city;
    I have no children, no descendants left,
    To occupy these mansions. On what friend
    Shall I a wretched sufferer turn my eyes,
    And hope to find relief? O thou dear face,
    Ye cheeks, ye hands! thee would to Heaven that fate
    In those embattled fields of Troy had slain
    Beside the waves of Simois!

    CHOR.                      He in death
    Hence would have found renown; thou too, old man,
    Wouldst have been happier.

    PEL.                      Thou, O wedlock, wedlock,
    These mansions and my city hast o’erthrown.
    My grandson, through the inauspicious nuptials
    By thee contracted, would to heaven my gates
    Had ne’er received that execrable fiend
    Hermione, thy bane! O had she first
    With thunderbolts been smitten! nor hadst thou,
    Presumptuous mortal, charged the Delphic god
    With having aimed the shaft which slew thy sire!

    CHOR. I will awake the sad funereal dirge,
    And wailing pay to my departed lord
    Such customary tribute as attends
    The shades of mighty chiefs.

    PEL.                        Ah me! at once
    With misery and old age bowed down to earth,
    I shed th’ incessant tear.

    CHOR.                      Thus hath the god
    Ordained, the god’s vindictive arm hath wrought
    All these calamities.

    PEL.                  O most beloved,
    This house, ah me! a desert hast thou left,
    And me a miserable old man made childless.

    CHOR. Before thy children, O thou aged man,
    Thou shouldst have died.

    PEL.                    Shall I not rend my hair,
    And beat with desperate hands this hoary head?
    O city! Phœbus hath of both my sons
    Deprived me.

    CHOR.        O thou miserable old man,
    What evils hast thou witnessed and endured!
    How wilt thou pass the remnant of thy life?

    PEL. Childless, forlorn, no period to my woes
    Can I discover, but till death must drink
    The bitter potion.

    CHOR.              Sure the gods in vain
    Showered blessings on thy nuptials.

    PEL.                                Fled and withered
    Is all our ancient pomp.

    CHOR.                    Alone thou mov’st
    Around thy lonely house.

    PEL.                    I have no city.
    Thee, O my sceptre, to the ground I cast,
    And from yon dreary caverns of the main,
    Daughter of Nereus, me wilt thou behold
    Utterly ruined, grovelling in the dust.

    CHOR. Ha! who was it that moved? what form divine
    Do I perceive? look there! ye nymphs, attend,
    With rapid passage through the fleecy clouds
    Borne onward, some divinity arrives
    At Phthia’s pastures, famed for generous steeds.

THETIS, PELEUS, CHORUS.

    THE. O Peleus, mindful of the ties which bound
    Our plighted love, I hither from the house
    Of Nereus come, and with these wholesome counsels
    Begin; despair not, though thy present woes
    Are grievous: for e’en I who should have borne
    A race of children such as ne’er might cause
    My tears to stream, have lost the son who crowned
    Our hopes, Achilles, swift of foot, the first
    Of Grecian heroes. But to thee, the motives
    Which brought me hither, will I now relate;
    O listen to my voice. Back to that altar
    Devoted to the Pythian god, convey
    This body of Achilles’ slaughtered son,
    And bury it; so shall his tomb declare
    The murderous violence Orestes’ band
    Committed: but yon captive dame, I mean
    Andromache, on Helenus bestowed
    In marriage, in Molossia’s land must dwell,
    And her young son, the only royal branch
    Which of the stem of Æacus remains;
    From him in long succession shall a race
    Of happy kings Molossia’s sceptre wield:
    Nor will our progeny, O aged man,
    Be utterly extinct, when blended thus
    With Ilion, still protected by the gods,
    Though by Minerva’s stratagems it fell.
    But, as for thee, that thou mayst know the blessing
    Of having wedded me, who am by birth
    A goddess and the daughter of a god,
    From all the ills which wait on human life
    Releasing, thee immortal will I make
    And incorruptible; with me a goddess
    In Nereus’ watery mansions thou a god
    Hereafter shalt reside, and from the waves
    Emerging with dry feet, behold our son
    Achilles, to his parents justly dear,
    Inhabiting that isle whose chalky coasts
    Are laved by the surrounding Euxine deep.
    But go to Delphi’s city by the gods
    Erected, thither bear this weltering corse,
    And when thou hast interred it, to this land
    Return, and in that cave which through the rock
    Of Sepia time hath worn, thy station keep
    Till from the waves I with my sister choir
    The fifty Nereids come, to bear thee hence.
    Thou must endure the woe’s imposed by fate,
    For thus hath Jove ordained. But cease to grieve
    For the deceased: for by the righteous gods
    The same impartial sentence is awarded
    To the whole human race, and death’s a debt
    Which all must pay.

    PEL.                Hail, venerable dame,
    Daughter of Nereus, my illustrious wife:
    For what thou dost is worthy of thyself,
    And of thy progeny. I cease to grieve
    At thy command, O goddess, and will go,
    Soon as my grandson’s corse I have interred,
    To Pelion’s cave, where first thy beauteous form
    I in these arms received. The man whose choice
    Is by discretion guided, should select
    A consort nobly born, and give his daughters
    To those of virtuous families, nor wish
    To wed a damsel sprung from worthless sires,
    Though to his house a plenteous dower she bring:
    So shall he ne’er incur the wrath of Heaven.

    CHOR. A thousand shapes our varying fates assume,
    The gods perform what we could least expect,
    And oft the things for which we fondly hoped
    Come not to pass: but Heaven still finds a clue
    To guide our steps through life’s perplexing maze.
    And thus does this important business end.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HECUBA AND OTHER PLAYS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


